Title: Podcast — Blog — Pieter L Valk
URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/category/Podcast

I recently went on the Head to Heart Podcast with Jenny Marcum, and she opened with a question she asks many of her guests: What has Jesus freed you from? If I’m honest, hearing the question brought back painful memories. As a gay Christian committed to historic sex ethics, I’ve often been asked why God hasn’t yet freed me from my same-sex attractions.

Paxton Barkdull recently had me on the Theology With Friends Podcast to talk about vocational singleness and LGBT+ topics, including how I arrived at a historic sexual ethic. It’s been a journey!

I recently had the opportunity to dialogue with Reginaldo dos Santos Gomes, who interviewed me for Vivendo em Comunhão. Reginaldo asked me to share how I came to terms with my sexuality and settled into vocational singleness. Many people (including Reginaldo) are surprised to hear that I dated women while being transparent about my sexuality, enjoyed romantic intimacy with them, and preferred to get married.

I recently went on the Political Animals Podcast with Jonathan Cole to talk politics, faith, and sexuality. At one point, we explored why the double standard of sexual stewardship costs Christians' credibility inside and outside of churches. Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married, teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

I recently went on the Church Politics Podcast with Justin Giboney of the AND Campaign to talk about faith and sexuality, including the recent controversy around Pastor Alistair Begg and whether Christians should attend gay weddings.

I recently went on the Canadian Church Leaders Podcast to talk with Chris Price about how churches can better offer Christ's love and wisdom to LGBT+ people. At one point, we explored why historic sexual ethics don't seem to be convincing for many modern Christians. I've said before that I'm confident that historic sexual ethics stand up to intellectual probing and questioning. By my assessment, the evidence for revisionist sexual ethics pales in comparison. But arguments about sexual ethics are often unconvincing and unhelpful. Why?

I went on the Good Christian Co. Podcast with Robby Ortiz and Joshua Delp to talk about faith and sexuality. At one point, they asked me how to navigate conversations where people disagree about the morality of gay marriage and gay sex. My solution: Don't talk about sexual ethics.

I went on the Goodlion Podcast to explore a variety of questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality, including the different ways broken sexuality shows up in our world. Christians may be quick to point to the broken reality of same-sex attractions, but everyone's sexuality is broken. Straight people lust after people they aren't married to. Married Christians can even lust after their own spouse.

I went on the Adventures in Theology podcast with Brayden Brookshier to talk about vocational singleness, including how God called me to vocational singleness. By the end of college I had experienced multiple long periods of singleness and studied Jesus & Paul's words about lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom…

Did God make me gay? I went on the Things You Don't Hear In Church Podcast to talk about faith and sexuality. One of the questions we explored was whether God intends for people to experience same-sex attraction.

Should Christians attend gay weddings? I recently joined Pastor David Hannah for a conversation with parents at the Church at West Franklin, a campus of Brentwood Baptist Church. We fielded lots of questions, including the perennial question about whether Christians should attend gay weddings.

If I don't condemn, am I condoning? Here's a better question: why do some Christians feel the need to condemn? I think they're afraid. We recently discussed this and more on the Authentically Us Podcast.

Help protect gay Christians from victim mentality. I went on the Voices in My Head Podcast with Rick Lee James to talk about faith and sexuality, including the barriers to gay Christian face to thriving according to God's wisdom.

Tim Lewis and Christelle Lerryn had me on the Oh No Not Another Live Show to talk about the intersection of faith and sexuality, mental health among LGBT+ people, and modern monasticism.

I  went on the Broken but Beautiful Podcast with JP Conway and Drue Clark to talk about how churches can better support those called to vocational singleness. First, teach what Jesus and Paul actually had to say about a lifetime calling to celibate singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention…

I went on the Pop Culture Catechism Podcast with Mike Tenney to talk about the romance idolatry in the tv show Schitt's Creek and what Christians can learn from the show.

Listen to this episode of the Sola-darity Podcast where Bridget Gee and I to talk about vocational singleness and LGBT+ topics.

Listen to this episode of the My Faithful Ally Podcast where Barney Miles and I dream about the churches we wish we had grown up in as gay kids (and what we hope churches become).

Listen to this episode of the "Where do we go from here?" podcast where Devi Abraham. Jessica Van Der Wyngaard, and I talk about purity culture and celibacy. The problem with "I Kissed Dating Goodbye" and True Love Waits wasn't traditional sexual ethics. It's that purity culture sold Christians the idol of romance. 

Watch this video interview with Samuel Perez of the Christian in Progress Podcast . He describes himself as an ex-gay Christian and a former gay stripper. He asked, "If a Christian dies without repenting of gay sex, does he go Hell?" My answer, "No!"

Helping churches love gay people & celibate Christians find family

Book to Speak

Explore Publications

Schedule for Counseling

Background/Bio

Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.

