Title: Top 5 Videos — Blog — Pieter L Valk
URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/category/Top+5+Videos

Checkout this chapel offered at Asbury Theological Seminary exploring God's true, good, and beautiful for gay people. Many Christians are theologically convinced of historic sexual ethics, but what we believe to be true doesn’t seem to be leading to good and beautiful in the lives of the LGBT+ people we know. As Christians, we have an inherent sense that what’s true should also be good and beautiful. So how do we make that a reality for the LGBT+ people we love?

Watch my lifetime commitments to NFOB and vocational singleness, check out some early reflections, and read articles along my journey to lifetime commitments.

Christians need to be able to make a winsome, positive case for a historic sexual ethic. But sometimes you get an email or someone knocks on your door, and the conversation goes something like, ”Yeah, I understand your arguments for a historic sexual ethic, but what about…” and they go on to list one of the convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic. How can you respond?

What is the vocational singleness that Jesus and Paul invited every Christian to consider? Is it still a call to family? How does one discern whether they’re called to vocational singleness?

As we celebrate Valentine’s Day nears, I reflect on the meaning of Christian marriage by recalling my toast at my brother’s recent wedding. The toast begins with some personal notes and focuses on the hope-giving nature of Christian marriage at 3:05 in the video.

When consulting with churches about better 1-on-1 ministry to gay people, I often get the same questions. Check out Part 1 of Top 10 Questions on LGBTQ+ Topics.

Watch this video exploring how can churches help those called to vocational singleness thrive with reasonable effort (regardless of sexual orientation).

Watch this video seminar exploring whether the gospel is good news for gay people. What do I believe, why do I hold those beliefs, and what should Church do differently?

Are gay people thriving according to God’s wisdom in your church? Watch this video about five common challenges churches face and five proven strategies for becoming churches where LGB people flourish according to a traditional sexual ethic.

Watch this video to deepen your vision for how God wants to use singleness, whether temporary or lifetime. What is vocational singleness? Why does God call people to vocational singleness?

Check out this preview of a seminar focusing on National Coming Out Day and Gay Pride Month.

Helping churches love gay people & celibate Christians find family

Book to Speak

Explore Publications

Schedule for Counseling

Background/Bio

Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.

