Title: Celibacy as Vocation on Preston Sprinkle’s Theology in the Raw Podcast — Pieter L Valk
URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/celibacy-as-vocation-on-preston-sprinkles-theology-in-the-raw-podcast

Preston Sprinkle had me on the Theology in the Raw Podcast to discuss discernment, vocational singleness, and my article in Christianity Today.In one segment we dove into my definitions of celibacy and marriage:God's best for Christians is either (1) a lifetime vocation of singleness to do more kingdom work or (2) a lifetime vocation of marriage between one man and one women to raise children for the kingdom."Isn't celibacy about more intimacy with the Lord? And isn't marriage about love and sex?"I explained that both vocational singleness and Christian marriage are a call to chaste intimacy in the context of permanent lived-in family. Both are images that teach people about God's love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.Instead, my quick definitions highlight what is unique:Christian marriage is uniquely a space for raising children. Note: I didn't say "bear" children. I recognize that many marriages are dealing with the painful reality of infertility.Vocational singleness is uniquely a space to use the time+energy+money that would have been spent on kids to instead do even more kingdom work.US government statistics recently showed that the average parent spends the equivalent of two decades of 40-hour work weeks raising children. Child-rearing is necessary, important, and time-consuming kingdom work.Still, these definitions are God's best "as a rule." Infrequently, there are exceptions to the rule. God calls some marriages not to raise children. God calls some vocational singles to raise children.Watch/listen to the podcast below!What do you think of my definitions of celibacy and marriage?Should celibacy be more about intimacy with God than kingdom work?Should marriage be more about romance+sex than raising children?

We also explore the following questions: Humans can live without sex, but we can’t live without love, intimacy, and community? So where does this leave Christian who are gay, who are also pursuing celibacy as a vocation?

Helping churches love gay people & celibate Christians find family

Book to Speak

Explore Publications

Schedule for Counseling

Background/Bio

Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.

