Title: Watch my Lifetime Commitments to NFOB & Vocational Singleness — Pieter L Valk
URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/watch-my-lifetime-commitments-to-nfob-amp-vocational-singleness

I'll be honest. During most of the actual ceremony, I was mentally stuck in one of the worst anxiety merry-go-round's I've experienced in years.

Two days before my commitments, one of the NFOB guys experienced a mental health break. The other guys in the house didn't know what to do, but I'd helped this brother through something similar a few years ago, so I need to carry a lot of the burden.

During the 48 hours leading up to the ceremony I was constantly on and off the phone talking to his doctor, making sure he picked up his meds, coordinating with his biofam, convincing him to take his meds, etc.

On the day-of, the brother was left at our house and then later got lost in the church. By the time I got to the 15 minute countdown to start the service, I was broken.

The ceremony was a swirl of worry, embarrassment, and discomfort.

Eventually I made it to the reception, and was able to enjoy the rest of the evening. Then over the coming days and weeks, I learned how normal my experience was and how blessed myself and others were regardless of my emotional experience.

As I shared honestly with married friends about my distractedness, nearly a dozen couples independently reassured me, "Well...to be honest...we had a hard time being present at our wedding. That seems pretty common. Don't worry!"

We planned the liturgy and sermon for my commitments to be particularly accessible to (and even compelling for) non-Christians, so I was deeply comforted when each of the people I'd invited who had the least context for singleness-for-Jesus each shared with me, "Pieter, it all makes sense now..." and shared how they finally saw the beauty of my choice to commit my life to God and a family of celibate brothers.

Moreover, I was reassured that regardless of my emotions, God was faithful during my commitments. He provided me with the full gift of singleness. He covenanted me with the Nashville Family of Brothers.

In the words of the late Fr. Thomas McKenzie, "It doesn't really matter what you feel. God is either doing it, or He isn't!"

And I was reassured that my lifetime commitments were only the beginning of a story that is still being written. Decades from now, my distractedness during the ceremony will be forgotten.

Instead, that day will be remembered as the start of whatever the Nashville Family of Brothers is about to build together.

I hope it's a beautiful story...



Ohh, and I almost forgot. None of this would have been possible without so many amazing people who pitched in! Thanks to...

Chloe, Callie, and Tyler for preserving my lifetime commitments forever (photography/video)

Cody Arashiro for preventing 100s of other day-ruining-possibilities (day-of event planner)

Kristen Tallau for fulfilling my mint chocolate cake dreams (baked the cakes)

Jonny Barahona and Jonathan Hoyt for delicious vocals, piano, and organ

Bishop Todd Hunter, Bishop Steven Tighe, Father Andrew Defusco, JP Conway, and Nathan Hale for officiating

Luminous Anglican Parish for letting us use their beautiful space

And last but not least, my parents, Henere and Sherry, for hosting a tear-full rehearsal dinner and supporting me over the past few years better than I ever could have expected



In anticipation of my lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to the Nashville Family of Brothers, I wrote this letter…

Some people assume that my same-sex attractions are the sole reason that I am committing to vocational singleness. Not so! For me, celibacy isn’t a consolation prize or a second-class vocation. I'm confident God would have called me to vocational singleness even if I were straight.

The short answer: whomever God gives me to love. 

For 24 hrs, I thought I might leave my family. God knew this summer would include some setbacks, so He made sure I was on sabbatical to provide plenty of bandwidth. I'm grateful. One of those tough moments was 24 hours when I seriously doubted re-committing to the Nashville Family of Brothers.

When I make lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to NFOB next month, I want some kind of physical symbol to remind me of my commitments and help me share my story with others. So I decided to get a tattoo.

If bachelor parties (at their best) are celebrations of the past and preparation for a lifetime commitment in the near future, then vocational singles deserve a bachelor party as much as any groom-to-be. So in July, some of the people who've been instrumental in my journey thus far helped me celebrate and prepare, complete with...

What is the vocational singleness that Jesus and Paul invited every Christian to consider? Is it still a call to family? How does one discern whether they’re called to vocational singleness?

During a recent Ask Me Anything, someone asked me how I refrain from gay sex and gay pornography. As I've shared consistently on this platform and when I speak publicly, I am not perfect. Years ago I struggled mightily with sexual addiction, and while I have experienced significant progress over the past five years, I am still a sinner in desperate need of a savior. But we are not without hope.

Some who know Jesus experience crippling doubt. Others who don’t yet know Jesus see a Creation in chaos. Christ’s promises seem to ring hollow, the kingdom is coming too slowly, the gospel feels feeble. Thankfully a potent vehicle of kingdom work and kingdom hope for the early Church is available to God’s people today, if we will only embrace and nourish it. Amid Christ’s ministry on earth, he instituted a vocation meant to give us hope for the kingdom to come and to bring forth that kingdom with undivided attention: the vocation of singleness.

"Whenever monks come back, marriages will come back."

My hope for the Church is that gay celibate Christians would find real family. What kind of family are we all made for? How can vocational singles, regardless of sexual orientation, build the permanent family they need?

In previous posts we established that Jesus and Paul are particularly commending permanent singleness in Matt 19 and 1 Cor 7. Later we explained WHY every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage, seeking God's preference for each of our lives. But HOW can we discern?

Why should every Christian young adult open-handedly discern between vocational singleness or Christian marriage? And what about reasonable objections?

Max Thurian’s “Marriage and Celibacy” is my go-to recommendation if reading on Protestant theology of celibacy. Check out this post about his book and an icon recently commissioned of the theologian.

Here's 5 reasons why Jesus and Paul *were* particularly talking about permanent singleness. Plus how recognition of this would change our churches.

Check out this transcript about the challenges of involuntary celibacy for gay Christians committed to a traditional sexual ethic and how they can embrace and thrive in their celibacy.

Is celibacy harder than marriage? I don't think so. Doing life with faithful Christian marriages has convinced me.

Is giving up gay romance a sacrifice? If not a sacrifice, why is gay celibacy so difficult?

From Fathom Magazine - Today, more Christian young adults are postponing marriage or considering never marrying than ever before, and the church at large fears plummeting marriage percentages and the declining birth rates that follow. As those numbers soften, their refrain booms louder: “If abstinent singleness isn’t easy for you, don’t worry. Just get married.” Armed with 1 Corinthians 7:9, they plead with the under-thirty crowd, “PLEASE. Get married.”

Helping churches love gay people & celibate Christians find family

Book to Speak

Explore Publications

Schedule for Counseling

Background/Bio

Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.

