URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/5-ways-churches-can-support-singles

TITLE: 5 Ways Churches can Support Singles — Pieter L Valk

5 Ways Churches can Support Singles
Podcast
Sexual Stewardship for All
Discernment
Vocational Singleness
Mar 29
Written By
Pieter Valk
I went on
the Broken but Beautiful Podcast with JP Conway and Drue Clark
to talk about how churches can better support those called to vocational singleness:
First, teach what Jesus and Paul actually had to say about a lifetime calling to celibate singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.
If we only ever teach about common singleness focused on self or casual dating, should we be surprised when few are living out the celibacy of Jesus and Paul?
Second, value vocational singleness by hiring vocational singles as head ministers, preaching pastors, worship leaders, youth pastors, and children’s pastors. Plus, choose vocational singles as elders and godparents. Kids needs to see our vocation valued.
Third, celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings. Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.
Fourth, guide every Christian young adult to open-handedly discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage by creating anticipation for discernment from an early age and teaching teens general Christian discernment.
Then in 20s and 30s, help young adults ask God which gift He wants to give and embrace His calling. Discernment practices may include studying theology, addressing emotional barriers in counseling, considering the kingdom work they’re called to, praying in community, and giving God time.
Fifth, help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family. Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community. Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.
The first act of the Church was to gather celibate women and offer them practical support to build family with each other. It's at the core of the Church's DNA to foster family for vocational singles.
Listen to the rest of the podcast episode at
https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/ep-13-living-single-in-the-church-w-pieter-l-valk/id1545493365?i=1000555464191
.
Want help taking these steps at your church? I help lead the premier consulting/training solution for churches who want to help vocational singles thrive, regardless of sexual orientation.
Reach out at
me@pieterLvalk.com
for more!
Pieter Valk