URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/does-failing-to-repent-of-gay-sex-send-you-to-hell

TITLE: Does failing to repent of gay sex send you to Hell? — Pieter L Valk

Does failing to repent of gay sex send you to Hell?
Video
Podcast
LGBT Topics
Sep 13
Written By
Pieter Valk
I went on the Christian in Progress Podcast with Samuel Perez. He describes himself as an ex-gay Christian and a former gay stripper.
Listen/watch the podcast at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1J0kWRYwWQ
He asked, "If a Christian dies without repenting of gay sex, does he go Hell?"
My answer, "No!"
Any sin, no matter how small, is enough to keep us from getting to Heaven on our own. But there is no sin, no matter how big, that can keep us from Heaven if we've trusted Jesus as our Lord and Savior.
If a person recognizes their sinfulness, confesses their need for a savior, and asks Jesus to be their personal Lord and Savior—if a person does all of these, Jesus promises to pay for and forgive all of our sins, past, present, and future.
Once we have received the Holy Spirit, our salvation is secure and God promises to be faithful to keep us in His hands (unless we choose to reject the Holy Spirit and renounce our faith).
Plus, the longer I've been a therapist, the more I'm convinced that all of us will die with some level of unrepentant sin. All of us hide part of reality from our consciousness. Yet Jesus will still welcome us.
"Why not continue sinning if we know we'll go to Heaven?"
Because sin still has consequences on this side of Heaven. God didn't arbitrarily forbid gay sex. Instead, God ordered the world perfectly and gave us choice so our love for Him would mean more.
Eventually humans chose to disobey God, sin entered the world, and everything bent. When God looked back at Creation, He noticed brokenness everywhere, but He also saw His original order continuing to shine through.
God gave us the Church and the Scriptures to clarify what is good for us and what will bring us pain and destruction.
So we should repent of our sins (regardless of the sin) and resist temptation in the future because sin hurts us.
But if we follow God's wisdom, we can experience more goodness and beauty and joy and true pleasure in this life.
Listen/watch the podcast at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1J0kWRYwWQ
Pieter Valk