URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/how-can-churches-offer-a-winsome-witness-to-lgbt-people

TITLE: How can churches offer a winsome witness to LGBT+ people? — Pieter L Valk

How can churches offer a winsome witness to LGBT+ people?
Reflection
LGBT Topics
Aug 3
Written By
Pieter Valk
In August 2021 I spent 10 hours with a Loyola University campus ministry teaching them how to help students thrive according to God's wisdom for sexual stewardship.
Here was their big question: How can we be a winsome witness to LGBT+ people who are curious about Jesus but repelled by perceptions of Christian homophobia?
1️⃣ CONFESS THE SINS OF THE CHURCH
You don't have to apologize for (or abandon) a traditional sexual ethic, but we should confess the ways Christians were complicit in hate crimes and propagated ex-gay theology that led millions of LGBT+ people to lose their life or faith.
2️⃣ OFFER CLARITY AS CHARITY
Obfuscating your theological beliefs hurts LGBT+ people when they learn you're more conservative/liberal than expected, leading to feelings of betrayal. Instead, speak clearly and publicly about your community's convictions.
3️⃣ TAKE PRACTICAL STEPS NOW
It is not enough to teach a traditional sexual ethic: churches must embody it in ways that lead to good and beautiful thriving for gay people. Seek training so leaders can provide better pastoral care, commit to sharing with every kid about God's love and wisdom before puberty to prevent the wounds of the closet, and cultivate intentional Christian community in your church where singles can find permanent lived-in family.
4️⃣ RAISE THE BAR FOR STRAIGHT SEXUALITY
Make sure straight Christians genuinely discern vocational singleness, Christian marriages are faithfully open to the kingdom work of raising children, and take seriously the Bible's teachings about unbiblical divorce and remarriage. These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God's inconvenient wisdom and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.
5️⃣ HELP FAITHFUL GAY CHRISTIANS THRIVE
Before doing outreach, make sure gay Christians in your community committed to a traditional sexual ethic experience good fruit. Mourn the wounds of the closet with them, offer theological clarity, provide better pastoral care, and help them build permanent lived-in family.
Want help offering a winsome witness at your church? It's what I do for a living. Contact me!
Pieter Valk