URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/if-its-not-a-salvation-issue-why-not-just-be-with-a-man

TITLE: If it’s not a salvation issue, why not just be with a man? — Pieter L Valk

If it’s not a salvation issue, why not just be with a man?
LGBT Topics
Video
Reflection
Apr 23
Written By
Pieter Valk
You guys know that I don’t think our beliefs or behavior around sexual ethics is a salvation issue. There are people I disagree with about gay marriage, gay romance, and gay sex who will be in heaven.
I recently shared about that at a church. While the head pastor and I were later debriefing the training, he asked me an honest question: if it’s not a salvation issue, why not just be with a man?
Why not have your cake and eat it too?
I said, “Well, because I actually believe this stuff! I actually believe that following God’s wisdom will lead to the best life possible for me.
“I think leaning into vocational singleness, leveraging my availability to find deep meaning and satisfaction in my kingdom work, and helping build an intentional Christian community where I find lifelong lived-in family (that’s just as love filled as any marriage) will all lead to a much better life than if I chased gay romance and marriage.
“I don’t think God’s wisdom about gay sex is arbitrary. I don’t think that God is holding out on something good on me.
“I’m convinced by the Scriptures and by personal experiences that God knows what He’s talking about. I touched the hot stove and I got burned!
“So far, following historic sexual ethics has seemed to lead to better things in my life than the people I’ve seen abandoning God’s wisdom over the past 15 years.
“I don’t think there’s an option to have one’s cake and eat it too. Ultimately like all opportunities and invitations like that, it’s a trap. I truly believe that the best plan is to follow God’s wisdom.”
Watch the video at https://www.instagram.com/reel/C6G7zpJrVf0/
Subscribe
Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.
Email Address
Sign Up
Thank you!
Pieter Valk