URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/is-celibacy-harder-than-marriage

TITLE: Is celibacy harder than marriage? — Pieter L Valk

Is celibacy harder than marriage?
Vocational Singleness
Sexual Stewardship for All
Reflection
Journey to Lifetime Commitments
Jul 19
Written By
Pieter Valk
I don't think so. Doing life with faithful Christian marriages has convinced me.
While there are exceptions to the rule, Christian marriage is generally a space for raising children. Faithful openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom is difficult.
Being a godparent has invited me deeper into families beautifully (and painfully) practicing an openness to God's gift of children. I've witnessed first-hand how much time, energy, and money it takes for two parents with moderately-paid full-time jobs to raise 2+ children.
Second, staying married to the same person for 50 years is difficult, even when you don't love/desire the other person anymore or your spouse has been unfaithful.
(Note: while adultery and abuse are *certainly* grounds for legal separation, the Scriptures consistently teach that they are not grounds for spiritual divorce or remarriage.)
Faithful Christian marriage is clearly difficult. And it's beautiful! Faithful Christian marriages share deep intimacy, experience unique joys of raising children, and are blessed with stability of relationship.
Faithful vocational singleness is also *very* beautiful. Vocational singleness done right leverages the first fruits of our labors to bring about the New Jerusalem more quickly, blessing our communities.
Vocational singleness done right has historically involved committing oneself to some form of permanent, lived-in human family through which God can love celibates tangibly.
Vocational singles faithfully enjoying human family and building the kingdom with undivided attention *for a lifetime* give the whole Church hope for Christ's return.
So if you think either vocational singleness or faithful Christian marriage are more difficult or more beautiful than the other, I'd encourage you to seek a deeper appreciation for how radically Jesus transformed both.
I'd encourage you to see how Jesus lifted both up as equally beautiful and equally kingdom-oriented!
Pieter Valk