URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/is-transition-or-suicide-backed-by-science

TITLE: Is "transition or suicide" backed by science? — Pieter L Valk

Is "transition or suicide" backed by science?
LGBT Topics
Video
Reflection
Mar 18
Written By
Pieter Valk
Eventually, every conversation about gender ethics and God’s wisdom for trans people seems to get to the point where someone claims, “Well, it’s transition or suicide.” And often, the conversation stops.
This matters, because we know 41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population.
Trans people were made in the image of God and God highly values them. Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their precious life isn't worth living.
Stats like that demand attention. They can’t be ignored.
But should is “transition or suicide” mantra true? Has transition been scientifically proven to reduce suicide risk?
Long story short: No. Available research is inconclusive about whether hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk.
Some scientific research demonstrated that use gender-affirming hormones or puberty blockers was associated with a lower risk of suicidal ideation.
Yet different analysis of the same data found that males going through hormonal transition were more likely to plan suicide, to attempt suicide, and to require hospitalization for a suicide attempt.
Similar analysis found that 16- and 17-year-olds who received hormones were more than twice as likely to report a past-year suicide attempt requiring inpatient hospitalization.
A similar story emerges for surgical transition.
Scientific studies have consistently found that surgical transition effectively reduces gender dysphoria and leads to high patient satisfaction, but they fail to reduce depression and suicidality. A longitudinal study of surgical transition in Denmark found that while 21.2% of participants experienced a reduction in suicidality after transition, 15.4% of participants experienced an increase in suicidality after transition.
Available research does not demonstrate that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk…
Read the rest of the research and analysis at https://equipyourcommunity.org/does-trans-suicide-risk-justify-transition/
Pieter Valk