URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/schitts-creek-idolizes-romance

TITLE: Schitt's Creek idolizes romance — Pieter L Valk

Schitt's Creek idolizes romance
Video
Podcast
LGBT Topics
Sexual Stewardship for All
Feb 22
Written By
Pieter Valk
I went on the Pop Culture Catechism Podcast with Mike Tenney to talk about what Christians can learn from the tv show Schitt's Creek.
In contrast to 2009 outrage against early LGBT+ representation in Glee and Modern family, it was refreshing to see gay characters presented as (mostly) normal and see otherwise-homophobic people on the internet using memes from the show.
I'm was grateful for the source of much-needed laughter during scarier phases of the pandemic. But I wasn't so grateful for the idolatry of romance that's particularly obvious in the relationships between David's character and Patrick and Stevie.
In earlier seasons I appreciated how David and Patrick's friendship made it safe for Patrick to leave the pain of the closet and live more honestly in the world. But the friendship's turn to romance and then sex (falsely) suggests to the audience that the most meaningful relationships must involve romance and sex.
In contrast, David and Stevie dabble in sexual activity but discover they'd rather be friends. At first the series teases that their friendship might be as meaningful as David's romantic relationship with Patrick, but as the show progresses, romance clearly eclipses friendship.
Stevie's character is left to search for other sources of belonging and meaning when it becomes clear David and Patricks romance leaves no room for the depth of friendship Stevie needs.
So what can Christians learn from Schitt's Creek?
Resist romance idolatry. Don't believe the lie that romance and sex are the marks of a meaningful relationship. Don't underestimate how richly satisfying a platonic friendship.
Everyday people and the tv show characters they empathize with are yearning for freedom from the idol of romance. What if we started in our churches, and then offered that freedom to those outside?
Listen to the full podcast episode at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jrUOzFrQ88
.
Pieter Valk