URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/sharing-the-gospel-with-gay-non-christians

TITLE: Sharing the gospel with gay non-Christians? — Pieter L Valk

Sharing the gospel with gay non-Christians?
Podcast
Top 10 by Pieter
Top 5 Podcasts
LGBT Topics
Sep 7
Written By
Pieter Valk
I went on The Kingdoms Podcast, and they asked, "How can churches do better gay outreach and invite gay non-Christians to church?"
My short answer: Start by getting the gospel right with gay Christians who already agree with you.
Why? If gay non-Christians and progressive gay Christians see people like me (gay Christians committed to a traditional sexual ethic) struggling in your churches, your outreach efforts will be wasted.
If those who already agree with your church's teachings seem to bear bad and ugly fruit (because of how churches have made gay faithfulness difficult), why would gay people who disagree want to visit or stick around?
So before churches spent time/energy/money on outreach to gay people who disagree with God's wisdom, invest in cultivating a space where gay Christians are actually thriving.
Don't think your church has gay Christians committed to God's wisdom for you to better support? If your churches have any kids, chances are you do (or will).
Some of the 5-year-olds in your churches will develop same-sex attractions in the next 5 years. Are the teachings they're hearing (and seeing embodied) setting them up to share early and embrace God's love and wisdom?
Or are you setting them up to hide in the closet for 5 years, suffer from anxiety + depression + unhealthy coping mechanisms, and then come out 5 years later either having abandoned God's wisdom or Jesus altogether?
Become churches where gay Christians committed to a traditional sexual ethic are thriving. Demonstrate that God's wisdom is not just true but also good and beautiful.
Then reach out to gay people who disagree with God's wisdom.
Listen to the podcast at
https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/36-pieter-valk-shares-his-story-of-embracing/id1553169747?i=1000534389389
Pieter Valk