URL: https://www.pieterlvalk.com/blog/the-curse-amp-glory-of-the-eunuch

TITLE: The Curse & Glory of the Eunuch — Pieter L Valk

The Curse & Glory of the Eunuch
Vocational Singleness
Sexual Stewardship for All
Discernment
Video
Jan 14
Written By
Pieter Valk
What can ancient eunuchs teach us about modern sexuality?
A few weeks ago I taught an Old Testament theology class at a local Christian university about the Curse and the Glory of the Eunuch.
How were celibate, childless people marginalized in the Old Testament? What promises were made to childless celibates? How did Jesus fulfill those promises? How might that shape the ways we think about our sexualities today?
We explored the need for universal marriage and procreation to fulfill God's Genesis 12-17 covenant with His people.
In contrast, eunuchs were cursed and unwelcome. But then Isaiah 56 prophesies about a savior who will offer the eunuch (and generally childless Christian celibates) belonging, spiritual children, and honor.
Finally, in Matthew 19, Jesus institutes the vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom to stand alongside marriage, with just as much human family and kingdom purpose.
But wait, isn't Jesus contradicting God's procreation mandate?!
Christ's life, death, and resurrection established a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises because we join God’s family by Christ’s work on the cross, not birth into a Jewish family.
*But* Jesus doesn't abolish the procreation mandate. Raising children for the sake of the kingdom continues to be an essential aspect of Christian marriage, as a rule.
We ended the class with the following question:
Jesus seems to challenge Christians to consider permanently giving up a spouse and children for the sake of serving our communities with undivided attention. Can Christians demand and take romance, marriage, and sex? Can we unthinkingly pursue those? Or must we pause and seriously consider Christ’s invitation?
What do you think?
Check out the video recording of the class (audio+slides). Discussion times are cut out to protect students' confidentiality, but feel free to pause and think outloud.
Photocred: Joel Briggs
Please check out his AMAZING stuff on Instagram
@joelbriggspaints
Subscribe
Sign up with your email address to receive news and updates.
Email Address
Sign Up
Thank you!
Pieter Valk