


CARING FOR

GAY STUDENTS

[Notes]
Info from Steve
welcome and framing of our time requesting our staff to (1) keep this internal (2) respond with respect and civility



Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
(3) Steve introduce Pieter:

Pieter Valk

a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
and for over 75 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries
 
He’s the founder and executive Director of Equip
the premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
They’ve trained over 20,000 Christian leaders
 
He’s a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
He’s the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
He’s a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And He graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University



God’s Good
for Gay People



Is the gospel great news for gay people?

[Notes]
PIETER

I want to start with a simple question
But probably the most important question

Is the gospel great news for gay people?
Or let’s lower the bar: Is the gospel at least good news for gay people?
It doesn’t seem like it.
Too often, churches seem to teach that the God of the Bible is not for gay people. That God hates gay people.
At best, churches are silent.
Then friends with a more progressive sexual sexual tell the same story but in a different way.
They say that the Bible—or at least how we’re read the Bible for the past 2,000 years—is bad news for gay people.
Our churches and our friends would lead us to believe that God’s teachings are bad news for sexual minorities.
 
And for good reason.






LOTS OF SLIDE IN BETWEEN HERE



Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All Christians are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways


[Notes]
PIETER

Often referred to as a compassionate traditional sexual ethic
Or a biblical sexual ethic
Or the historic Christian sexual ethic

Pros – honors God’s wisdom in Scripture while also recognizing that people don’t choose their attractions
And that there’s no way to make gay people straight
Allows space for same-sex attracted Christians to notice their connectedness to other gay people who have struggled in the closet
And struggled to share their stories and endure physical violence
It also resist the idolatry of romance and the lie that everyone has to have sex to be a whole person
You’ll notice that’s one thing Side A and Side X have in common
Both push the idea that we need marriage and sex to be whole people
Side X says we should all have that with someone of the opposite sex
And Side A says we should have that with whomever we’re attracted to, regardless of sex
But both meaningfully discount the celibacy of Jesus and Paul and so many Christians over the past 2000 years
Both meaningfully discount the fact that we will all be celibate in heaven and fully satisfied
Plus, unlike the suicidality caused by Side X and the loss of faith caused by Side A,
Scientific studies of the mental health of gay celibate Christians reported in the book “Costly Obedience”
Demonstrate that gay celibate Christians have just as good mental health outcomes as the average person
Or to put it more simply, Side B doesn’t increase your risk of suicide

Cons – but this is still a difficult pill to swallow, right?
It’s sad to have to accept that some parts of us are broken and won’t be made right on this side of Heaven
It’s unfair that gay people seem to have to deal with more difficulty because of that enduring brokenness
And we’re hopeful that if Christian communities adopted these beliefs and compassionately and empathetically helped gay people
That gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic would thrive
That they’d feel connected and loved in their community of family and friends
That they’d feel loved by God and connected to him
But unfortunately most Christian communities have historically believed and embodied Side A or Side X
They haven’t given Side B, a compassionate traditional sexual ethic a chance







Share



If students were part of a community of Christians who fully believed and embodied this Side B perspective, how might that help LGBT+ students integrate their faith and sexuality?
1:08

[Notes]
 PIETER facilitate



CARE PLAN


[Notes]
STEVE

Pieter just shared with you three different ways that Christians make sense of God’s love and wisdom for gay people.
Here at the Academy, we’re committed to biblical wisdom and Christ-like compassion.
Academy leadership are convinced that the Side B perspective, that compassionate traditional sexual ethic, honors our commitments to Scripture and deep empathy.
It strikes the right balance between holding to biblical wisdom for gay people, recognizing that gay people don’t choose to be gay, recognizing that sexual orientation change is uncommon, and recognizing that LGBT+ students need spaces where they can share their stories, find belonging, and find support to follow God’s wisdom.

But clarity about the Academy’s convictions is only the beginning. We are committed to take the steps necessary to make sure gay students get the care and support they need and deserve…



Academy Care Plan



Recognize harm against LGBT+ people and offer clarity as charity
Equip teachers to support LGBT+ students
Train an LGBT+ Student Care Team to provide long-term discipleship
Garner buy-in from local Christian leaders
Guide parents to have ongoing conversation
Educate students and encourage them to seek support

[Notes]
STEVE

Here is the Academy’s Plan for Caring for LGBT+ Students:

First, underpinning every conversation leaders and teachers will have with parents and students will be a recognition of the harms against LGBT+ people.
In particular, over-promising sexual orientation change, holding gay people to Biblical wisdom while too often looking the other way when straight people are committing sexual sin, calling gay people to celibacy but supporting singleness poorly, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate from Christians have hurt gay people deeply.
Another key commitment of our Care Plan is to share clearly about God’s love and wisdom for gay people as a form of charity. LGBT+ people (and increasing all people) prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally misleading people into believing that we hold a progressive sexual ethic.

Second, the Academy will equip teachers to care for LGBT+ students according to God’s love and wisdom. That’s what we’re beginning today!

Third, the Academy has already assembled a small group of Academy leaders, pastors, and counselors to receive more extensive training to provide long-term support and discipleship to LGBT+ students.

Fourth, in the coming weeks and months, the Academy will meet with Christian leaders in local church to gain their support and hopefully to encourage them to adopt similar practices of biblical compassion.

Fifth, we are currently discerning the best ways to engage parents. Perhaps sometime next Spring, the Academy will host a Parent Seminar exploring these topics and equipping parents for these conversations with their kids.

And last but not least, sometime next spring, the Academy will educate students about sexual stewardship for all people, including LGBT+ students. We will encourage students to reach out for support if they experience same-sex attraction or gender incongruence. And we will take the sexual stewardship of all students seriously, including wisdom around casual and physically-intimate dating.










God’s Good
for Gay People



How do different Christians think about God’s wisdom for gay people?
How will the Academy invite gay students to steward their sexualities?
How does the Academy hope to support students and parents?
How can you care for students according to the Academy’s convictions?
How can you respond compassionately when students share?

[Notes]
PIETER
So we’ve explored how different Christians think about God’s wisdom for gay people,
explained how the Academy invites students to steward their sexualities,
And shared a vision for how the Academy hopes to support students and parents around these questions



STUDENT CARE


[Notes]
PIETER

Now let’s explore how you can help care for students according to the Academy’s conviction
Including some universal wisdom about responding with compassion when students share that this is part of their story, regardless of convictions




Your Responsibility



We won’t ask you to judge students, tell them they’re right, or tell them what to do off campus.

We’ll only ask you to teach the Academy’s convictions and refrain from contradicting those convictions.

[Notes]
STEVE

First, I want to be clear how Academy Leadership expects you to teach about these topics and care for students.

I want to start by reminding you that the only policy the Academy has for student conduct is that students refrain from public displays of affection / romantic expression on campus, regardless of sexual orientation or whether they’re dating someone of the opposite sex or the same sex.
We will not ask you to tell students what to do outside of school.
We will not ask you to judge students or tell them whether they’re right or wrong.
We will only ask you to teach when appropriate according to the Academy’s convictions and to refrain from contradicting those convictions.

That being said, let’s explore five different scenarios and how we invite you to care for students:





Your Responsibility



#1: If you teach about singleness, marriage, and sexuality in class…offer the Side B perspective.

If you need more resources or hesitate to honor this request, please contact Academy leadership.

[Notes]
STEVE

#1
If you teach about singleness, marriage, or sexuality in class, we ask you to offer the compassionate, traditional sexual ethic that we’ve outlined here.
We also ask you to refrain from teaching either that Side A position or that Side X position.
If you want to honor this request but feel you need more training to do so, please reach out to Academy Leadership and we’ll connect you with more resources.
If you hesitate to honor this request because you disagree, please reach out to Academy Leadership.
We want to hear from you and navigate this together.





Your Responsibility



#2: If students ask you about sexual ethics individually, we ask you to reiterate the Academy's convictions.

#3: If a student comes out to you and is at risk of self-harm, connect with DECE.




[Notes]
STEVE

#2
If students ask you about sexual ethics individually, we ask you to reiterate the Academy's convictions.
You can also encourage the student to have conversation with their parents.
Please refrain from suggesting directly or indirectly that you disagree with the Academy’s convictions. 

#3
If a student discloses to you that they experience same-sex attraction or gender dysphoria, our first priority is to make sure the student is getting the care they need if they show any signs of being at risk of harming themselves.
If there is any hint that the student is at risk, please connect the student to DECE and allow them to assess the student’s needs.





Your Responsibility



#4: If a student comes out to you and isn’t at risk of self-harm…
“God loves you, we love you, we want to support you” and then connect with LGBT+ Student Care Team


[Notes]
STEVE


#4
If a student discloses same-sex attraction or gender incongruence to you and they aren’t at risk of self-harm, please let them know that you love them, that God loves them, and that the Academy is eager to support them as they make sense of their story.
Then share that the Academy has gathered a group of teachers who have received special training to support LGBT+ students.
Then ask them which member of the LGBT+ Student Care Team they would prefer for you to connect them with, connect them with that LGBT+ Student Care Team member, and let that individual provide future support.





Your Responsibility



#5: If a student comes out to you and asks you not to share with their parents…
“I won’t lie if asked. If risk of self-harm, I must share with DECE. I’d encourage you to find some way to share with parents.


[Notes]
STEVE


#5
If a student comes out to you and asks you not to share with their parents, please make clear that you will not lie to their parents if you are asked, that if you worry there's a risk of self-harm you will connect them with DECE who will likely involve their parents, and encourage them to find a healthy way to share with parents.



Share



What do you find encouraging about the Academy’s plan to care for students? What’s missing? How could you contribute?
1:28

[Notes]
 PIETER facilitate






Do you think I chose to be gay?
None of us are how God made us to be
Neither born gay nor chose to be gay
The Big Questions

[Notes]
PIETER

What does it look like to answer students’ questions about faith and sexuality in ways that reflect the Academy’s convictions?
Let’s explore 7 commons questions that come up about faith and sexuality
And model how you could respond if you wanted to engage in conversation
I want to be clear: I’m not offering responses to these questions so you can go find gay students and tell them the answers
But I’m pretty confident that none of yall would do that
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when students raise them if you want to engage in conversation
But I want to remind you that you don’t have you
You can choose to briefly confirm the Academy’s convictions and then refer the student to the LGBT+ Student Care Team


First, a student might ask: Do you think I chose to be gay?

If a student asks this, they’re getting at the classic question: do people choose to be gay, or are they born gay?

I want to be clear upfront: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
People do not choose their sexual orientation.

Now to the second question: Are people born gay?
Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.
And if God intended people to be gay, He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the same sex.
So are people born gay?

Scientific study of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual found that 52% of male twins were both gay¹.
However, as the study was replicated, that number oscillated over time from 48%² to 65.8%³ and then down to 11%⁴ and 7.7%⁵.
If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so the findings suggest that same-sex attraction is not genetically determined but may be genetically predisposed,
as the frequency of same-sex attraction is higher among twins where one twin experiences same-sex attraction than among the general population.

Scientists have also studied hormone levels in the womb in an attempt to discover a relationship between irregular hormone levels and same-sex attraction,
but those studies have been similarly inconclusive.

The consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
As a result, we would conclude that no one is born gay:
scientific evidence does not support the claim that sexual orientation is genetically determined.

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be
we are all corrupted at a genetic level before birth, formed brokenly in the womb, and quickly injured by the broken world we are born into.
None of us are how God made us to be.

So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.
More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).
