

[Notes]
Info from Steve
welcome and framing of our time requesting our staff to (1) keep this internal (2) respond with respect and civility




CARING FOR

GAY STUDENTS

[Notes]
Info from Steve
welcome and framing of our time requesting our staff to (1) keep this internal (2) respond with respect and civility



Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
(3) Steve introduce Pieter:

Pieter Valk

a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
and for over 75 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries
 
He’s the founder and executive Director of Equip
the premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
They’ve trained over 20,000 Christian leaders
 
He’s a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
He’s the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
He’s a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And He graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University



God’s Good
for Gay People



Is the gospel great news for gay people?

[Notes]
I want to start with a simple question
But probably the most important question

Is the gospel great news for gay people?
Or let’s lower the bar: Is the gospel at least good news for gay people?
It doesn’t seem like it.
Too often, churches seem to teach that the God of the Bible is not for gay people. That God hates gay people.
At best, churches are silent.
Then friends with a more progressive sexual sexual tell the same story but in a different way.
They say that the Bible—or at least how we’re read the Bible for the past 2,000 years—is bad news for gay people.
Our churches and our friends would lead us to believe that God’s teachings are bad news for sexual minorities.
 
And for good reason.



God’s Good
for Gay People



86% of gay people grew up in church (compared to 75% in gen pop)

54% of LGBT+ people have left the faith

[Notes]
In the most extensive study of LGBT+ people and the Church,
Andrew Marin’s Us Versus Us reveals that
86% of gay people  grew up in church
Compared to only 75% of the general population
But of those LGBT+ people, 54% have left the faith



God’s Good
for Gay People



Gay teens are 5x more likely to attempt suicide
Religious LGBT+ youth are 38% more likely to be suicidal
Gay teens from highly rejecting families are 8.4x more likely to attempt suicide

[Notes]
Why?
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their peers.
LGBT+ youth who say religion is important to them are 38% more likely to be suicidal than their non-religious LGBT+ peers,
suggesting that homophobic religious beliefs increase teens’ vulnerability to depression.
And gay teens who come from highly rejecting families are 8.4 times more likely to attempt suicide than other gay teens.



God’s Good
for Gay People



Hate crimes are committed against LGBT+ people every day
73% of LGBT+ people view evangelical churches as unfriendly


[Notes]
Hate crimes are committed against LGBT people every day.
And according to the Pew Research Center, 73% of LGBT people view evangelical churches as unfriendly.

But what if God actually wants to offer the best things to gay people? And particularly to your students who experience same-sex attraction?
What if Christian communities have done a poor job of offering what God wants to offer,
but God’s wisdom is actually very good news for your students?

Today I want to explore that question
And how you can care for LGBT+ students well
How you can encourage them to get to know Jesus and live a Jesus-filled life, despite the challenges they may face



God’s Good
for Gay People



How do different Christians think about God’s wisdom for gay people?
How will the Academy invite gay students to steward their sexualities?
How does the Academy hope to support students and parents?
How can you care for students according to the Academy’s convictions?
How can you respond compassionately when students share?

[Notes]
We’ll do that by first delving into different perspectives on God’s wisdom for gay people
Second, we’ll explain how the Academy invites students to steward their sexualities
Third, we’ll cast a vision for how the Academy hopes to support students and parents around these questions
Fourth, we’ll explore how you can help care for students according to the Academy’s convictions
And then we’ll end with some universal wisdom about responding with compassion when students share that this is part of their story, regardless of convictions

NOTE ABOUT TERMINOLOGY

Ohh, and another quick note about ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people
The specific guidance for discipleship are very different and deserve their own space
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry


Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic






Traditional sexual ethic:
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a traditional sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)



my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay AND afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 1000s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
 
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity
I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.
I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.
These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
 
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started EQUIP in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family

That’s my story
Now I want to give you all a chance to share your stories
Your stories of supporting students who experience same-sex attraction
Or your stories of doing life with LGBT+ people among your friends and family outside of work
My hunch is all of us are touched by this topic in a personal way
And it’s important to recognize how personal these conversations are and honor that



Share



How have you seen students who experience same-sex attraction or gender incongruence struggle with mental health and/or their faith?
29

[Notes]
 



WHAT?


[Notes]
In light of my story and my faith, what have I come to understand God’s wisdom for my life to be?
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons
To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch
(2) For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions
(3) For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a traditional sexual ethic



What do I believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay (Matthew 6:12-13, James 1:14-15, Hebrews 4:15)
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin (John 10:28-30, Romans 8:38-39, Ephesians 4:30)

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,



What do I believe?



God does not send people to hell merely for being gay (Romans 1:26-28, Romans 5:12, James 1:13, Psalm 51:5)
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond

[Notes]
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore

Fifth, I don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond






A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage (Matthew 19, 1 Corinthians 7, Ephesians 5)
What do I believe?

[Notes]
Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do miracles,
And sometimes he does!
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
I believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments I grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life

What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to traditional sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)






There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context (Romans 1, Leviticus 18:22, Leviticus 20:13, 1 Corinthians 6:9-10)
What do I believe?

[Notes]
There’s also no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
Even without investigating the so-called clobber passages that Christians have historically understood to prohibit same-sex sexual activity
We can conclude from what God has clearly said about what His best is for us (vocational singleness or Christian marriage)
And the absence of affirmation of same-sex sexual activity in any context
That same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

Okay, so that’s what I believe
What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a progressive sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction

For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of dating relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I want, I started asking God in 2014 what He wanted for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So in 2018 some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers
A place where I could find lifelong, lived-in family with others called to vocational singleness



WHY?


[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design






Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singleness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best



Honestly, I wish…



But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic: my gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
You see, even if I could somehow convince myself theologically that God would bless a same-sex marriage between two Christians
I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my life and the lives of others

Primarily, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobats to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said
So they continue believing that God fully blesses same-sex marriages,
but they just concluded that the Bible is not binding or authoritative for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?

and listen, I don’t want that for my gay friends
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith

I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that a traditional sexual ethic is what’s best for me!



Bad fruit everywhere



Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a traditional sexual ethic because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic

But that’s just one perspective
Christians have come to a variety of conclusions about God’s love and wisdom for gay people
So I’d like to take some time to explore different clusters of belief











What do you believe?

[Notes]
Now, you might assume that everyone falls neatly into either a pro-gay marriage camp or an anti-gay marriage camp
But it’s actually more nuanced than that
Instead, I want to describe three different clusters of belief along a spectrum
We’ll refer to these three clusters as Side A, Side B, and Side X
What we’re going to do is explore the pros and cons of each of these perspectives
And I want to give you time to individually consider each of them
Also note that these are along a spectrum. These describe beliefs shared by a concentration of people at certain points along this spectrum, but you may find that you believe something somewhere in the middle of one of these points
That’s okay




Side A



God makes people gay
God blesses same-sex marriages in the same ways that He blesses opposite-sex marriages
Requires theological maneuvering or a belief that the Bible is not binding/prescriptive for a modern context 

[Notes]
Sometimes referred to as a progressive sexual ethic
Or a revisionist sexual ethic

Pros – some of you have closet friends or family who are LGBT+ people
Perhaps they’ve shared with you about their journey of trying to ignore their sexuality or become straight
Because they really wanted to make their parents and Jesus happy
But try to ignore or change their sexuality only led them feeling ashamed and depressed and disconnected from God
And they just can’t imagine being happy without romance and love and sex
Perhaps you want to believe that a loving God wants romantic and sexual love for everyone, including gay people
Perhaps you just can’t believe that God really meant for the “clobber passages” (the verses that some say prohibit gay sex)-–that God really meant for those passages to condemn monogamous love between people of the same sex
That’s what’s really happened is that we’ve misinterpreted those passages

Cons – on the other hand, if we believe that a God exists, that that God knows what’s best for us better than we do,
And that God is revealed to us by the Scriptures and the Church, there just isn’t enough evidence for Side A
There’s much more evidence in Scripture that God’s wisdom for us isn’t Side A
Even if we only look at the so-called “clobber passages” there’s overwhelmingly more evidence that they indeed call gay sex a sin
Plus, few gay Christians seem to hold onto their faith after they adopt a Side A position
Over 3-4 years, of seeking out same-sex relationships, they seem to fall away from Jesus







What do you believe?

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Side X at the other end of the spectrum



Side X



Same-sex attracted Christians must reject their attractions and work toward change
Continuing to experience SSA is a sign of willful disobedience
Homosexuality is sinful
God intends for all people to marry someone of the opposite sex

[Notes]
Sometimes referred to as ex-gay theology
Or Pray-the-gay-away theology

Pros – at first glance, it seems to take God’s prohibitions against gay sex seriously
In general, Scripture seems to encourage Christians to pray for and hope for healing
We want to believe that God is a good father who would give us relief from a brokenness if we ask for it
Those who would rather err on the side of being more cautions about temptation might find this wise

Cons – unfortunately, while God has the power to do whatever He wants, consistent scientific studies
Have found that 96% of people who attempt sexual orientation change experience ZERO change in their attractions
Yet, the same research found that attempting sexual orientation change nearly doubles their risk of suicide
Plus we see in Scripture that God often doesn’t heal brokenness in our lives
When Paul asks God to remove the thorn in his flesh, God denies him, and makes clear that God has even better plans
I’m sure all of us could go around the room and share about some physical or mental or emotional or spiritual wound that
You asked God to heal but He hasn’t
Not because He isn’t good
But because healing isn’t always the best path for us
Plus, we also see in Scripture that it’s not a sin to be tempted
Even Jesus is tempted
It only becomes a sin when we say “yes” to a temptation in thought, word, or deed
So experiencing enduring same-sex attractions couldn’t be a sin








What do you believe?

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Side B, in the middle of Side A and Side X



Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All Christians are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways


[Notes]
Often referred to as a compassionate traditional sexual ethic
Or a biblical sexual ethic
Or the historic Christian sexual ethic

Pros – honors God’s wisdom in Scripture while also recognizing that people don’t choose their attractions
And that there’s no way to make gay people straight
Allows space for same-sex attracted Christians to notice their connectedness to other gay people who have struggled in the closet
And struggled to share their stories and endure physical violence
It also resist the idolatry of romance and the lie that everyone has to have sex to be a whole person
You’ll notice that’s one thing Side A and Side X have in common
Both push the idea that we need marriage and sex to be whole people
Side X says we should all have that with someone of the opposite sex
And Side A says we should have that with whomever we’re attracted to, regardless of sex
But both meaningfully discount the celibacy of Jesus and Paul and so many Christians over the past 2000 years
Both meaningfully discount the fact that we will all be celibate in heaven and fully satisfied
Plus, unlike the suicidality caused by Side X and the loss of faith caused by Side A,
Scientific studies of the mental health of gay celibate Christians reported in the book “Costly Obedience”
Demonstrate that gay celibate Christians have just as good mental health outcomes as the average person
Or to put it more simply, Side B doesn’t increase your risk of suicide

Cons – but this is still a difficult pill to swallow, right?
It’s sad to have to accept that some parts of us are broken and won’t be made right on this side of Heaven
It’s unfair that gay people seem to have to deal with more difficulty because of that enduring brokenness
And we’re hopeful that if Christian communities adopted these beliefs and compassionately and empathetically helped gay people
That gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic would thrive
That they’d feel connected and loved in their community of family and friends
That they’d feel loved by God and connected to him
But unfortunately most Christian communities have historically believed and embodied Side A or Side X
They haven’t given Side B, a compassionate traditional sexual ethic a chance







Share



If students were part of a community of Christians who fully believed and embodied this Side B perspective, how might that help LGBT+ students integrate their faith and sexuality?
1:08

[Notes]
 



CARE PLAN


[Notes]
STEVE

Pieter just shared with you three different ways that Christians make sense of God’s love and wisdom for gay people.
Here at the Academy, we’re committed to biblical wisdom and Christ-like compassion.
Academy leadership are convinced that the Side B perspective, that compassionate traditional sexual ethic, honors our commitments to Scripture and deep empathy.
It strikes the right balance between holding to biblical wisdom for gay people, recognizing that gay people don’t choose to be gay, recognizing that sexual orientation change is uncommon, and recognizing that LGBT+ students need spaces where they can share their stories, find belonging, and find support to follow God’s wisdom.

But clarity about the Academy’s convictions is only the beginning. We are committed to take the steps necessary to make sure gay students get the care and support they need and deserve…



Academy Care Plan



Recognize harm against LGBT+ people and offer clarity as charity
Equip teachers to support LGBT+ students
Train an LGBT+ Student Care Team to provide long-term discipleship
Garner buy-in from local Christian leaders
Guide parents to have ongoing conversation
Educate students and encourage them to seek support

[Notes]
STEVE

Here is the Academy’s Plan for Caring for LGBT+ Students:

First, underpinning every conversation leaders and teachers will have with parents and students will be a recognition of the harms against LGBT+ people.
In particular, over-promising sexual orientation change, holding gay people to Biblical wisdom while too often looking the other way when straight people are committing sexual sin, calling gay people to celibacy but supporting singleness poorly, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate from Christians have hurt gay people deeply.
Another key commitment of our Care Plan is to share clearly about God’s love and wisdom for gay people as a form of charity. LGBT+ people (and increasing all people) prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally misleading people into believing that we hold a progressive sexual ethic.

Second, the Academy will equip teachers to care for LGBT+ students according to God’s love and wisdom. That’s what we’re beginning today!

Third, the Academy has already assembled a small group of Academy leaders, pastors, and counselors to receive more extensive training to provide long-term support and discipleship to LGBT+ students.

Fourth, in the coming weeks and months, the Academy will meet with Christian leaders in local church to gain their support and hopefully to encourage them to adopt similar practices of biblical compassion.

Fifth, we are currently discerning the best ways to engage parents. Perhaps sometime next Spring, the Academy will host a Parent Seminar exploring these topics and equipping parents for these conversations with their kids.

And last but not least, sometime next spring, the Academy will educate students about sexual stewardship for all people, including LGBT+ students. We will encourage students to reach out for support if they experience same-sex attraction or gender incongruence. And we will take the sexual stewardship of all students seriously, including wisdom around casual and physically-intimate dating.










God’s Good
for Gay People



How do different Christians think about God’s wisdom for gay people?
How will the Academy invite gay students to steward their sexualities?
How does the Academy hope to support students and parents?
How can you care for students according to the Academy’s convictions?
How can you respond compassionately when students share?

[Notes]
PIETER
So we’ve explored how different Christians think about God’s wisdom for gay people,
explained how the Academy invites students to steward their sexualities,
And shared a vision for how the Academy hopes to support students and parents around these questions



STUDENT CARE


[Notes]
PIETER

Now let’s explore how you can help care for students according to the Academy’s conviction
Including some universal wisdom about responding with compassion when students share that this is part of their story, regardless of convictions




Your Responsibility



We won’t ask you to judge students, tell them they’re right, or tell them what to do off campus.

We’ll only ask you to teach the Academy’s convictions and refrain from contradicting those convictions.

[Notes]
STEVE

First, I want to be clear how Academy Leadership expects you to teach about these topics and care for students.

I want to start by reminding you that the only policy the Academy has for student conduct is that students refrain from public displays of affection / romantic expression on campus, regardless of sexual orientation or whether they’re dating someone of the opposite sex or the same sex.
We will not ask you to tell students what to do outside of school.
We will not ask you to judge students or tell them whether they’re right or wrong.
We will only ask you to teach when appropriate according to the Academy’s convictions and to refrain from contradicting those convictions.

That being said, let’s explore five different scenarios and how we invite you to care for students:





Your Responsibility



#1: If you teach about singleness, marriage, and sexuality in class…offer the Side B perspective.

If you need more resources or hesitate to honor this request, please contact Academy leadership.

[Notes]
STEVE

#1
If you teach about singleness, marriage, or sexuality in class, we ask you to offer the compassionate, traditional sexual ethic that we’ve outlined here.
We also ask you to refrain from teaching either that Side A position or that Side X position.
If you want to honor this request but feel you need more training to do so, please reach out to Academy Leadership and we’ll connect you with more resources.
If you hesitate to honor this request because you disagree, please reach out to Academy Leadership.
We want to hear from you and navigate this together.





Your Responsibility



#2: If students ask you about sexual ethics individually, we ask you to reiterate the Academy's convictions.

#3: If a student comes out to you and is at risk of self-harm, connect with DECE.




[Notes]
STEVE

#2
If students ask you about sexual ethics individually, we ask you to reiterate the Academy's convictions.
You can also encourage the student to have conversation with their parents.
Please refrain from suggesting directly or indirectly that you disagree with the Academy’s convictions. 

#3
If a student discloses to you that they experience same-sex attraction or gender dysphoria, our first priority is to make sure the student is getting the care they need if they show any signs of being at risk of harming themselves.
If there is any hint that the student is at risk, please connect the student to DECE and allow them to assess the student’s needs.





Your Responsibility



#4: If a student comes out to you and isn’t at risk of self-harm…
“God loves you, we love you, we want to support you” and then connect with LGBT+ Student Care Team


[Notes]
STEVE


#4
If a student discloses same-sex attraction or gender incongruence to you and they aren’t at risk of self-harm, please let them know that you love them, that God loves them, and that the Academy is eager to support them as they make sense of their story.
Then share that the Academy has gathered a group of teachers who have received special training to support LGBT+ students.
Then ask them which member of the LGBT+ Student Care Team they would prefer for you to connect them with, connect them with that LGBT+ Student Care Team member, and let that individual provide future support.





Your Responsibility



#5: If a student comes out to you and asks you not to share with their parents…
“I won’t lie if asked. If risk of self-harm, I must share with DECE. I’d encourage you to find some way to share with parents.


[Notes]
STEVE


#5
If a student comes out to you and asks you not to share with their parents, please make clear that you will not lie to their parents if you are asked, that if you worry there's a risk of self-harm you will connect them with DECE who will likely involve their parents, and encourage them to find a healthy way to share with parents.



Share



What do you find encouraging about the Academy’s plan to care for students? What’s missing? How could you contribute?
1:28

[Notes]
 PIETER






Do you think I chose to be gay?
None of us are how God made us to be
Neither born gay nor chose to be gay
The Big Questions

[Notes]
What does it look like to answer students’ questions about faith and sexuality in ways that reflect the Academy’s convictions?
Let’s explore 7 commons questions that come up about faith and sexuality
And model how you could respond if you wanted to engage in conversation
I want to be clear: I’m not offering responses to these questions so you can go find gay students and tell them the answers
But I’m pretty confident that none of yall would do that
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when students raise them if you want to engage in conversation
But I want to remind you that you don’t have you
You can choose to briefly confirm the Academy’s convictions and then refer the student to the LGBT+ Student Care Team


First, a student might ask: Do you think I chose to be gay?

If a student asks this, they’re getting at the classic question: do people choose to be gay, or are they born gay?

I want to be clear upfront: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
People do not choose their sexual orientation.

Now to the second question: Are people born gay?
Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.
And if God intended people to be gay, He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the same sex.
So are people born gay?

Scientific study of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual found that 52% of male twins were both gay¹.
However, as the study was replicated, that number oscillated over time from 48%² to 65.8%³ and then down to 11%⁴ and 7.7%⁵.
If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so the findings suggest that same-sex attraction is not genetically determined but may be genetically predisposed,
as the frequency of same-sex attraction is higher among twins where one twin experiences same-sex attraction than among the general population.

Scientists have also studied hormone levels in the womb in an attempt to discover a relationship between irregular hormone levels and same-sex attraction,
but those studies have been similarly inconclusive.

The consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
As a result, we would conclude that no one is born gay:
scientific evidence does not support the claim that sexual orientation is genetically determined.

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be
we are all corrupted at a genetic level before birth, formed brokenly in the womb, and quickly injured by the broken world we are born into.
None of us are how God made us to be.

So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.
More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).






Did God make me gay?
Does God make people gay?
Give people over to “a depraved mind”?
Allow people to develop same-sex attraction?
Play no part?
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Second a student might ask: Did God make me gay?

Or does God give people over to a “depraved mind” of same-sex attraction as a result of sexual immorality and idolatry?
Or does God just allow same-sex attraction to develop?
Or did God play no part in the development of same-sex attraction?






Did God make me gay?
Did not intend for anyone to be gay or make anyone gay (James 1:13, Romans 1:26-27) 
We are all corrupted at a genetic level and grow up in a broken world (Psalm 51:5) 
God allowed it to happen (Romans 5:12)
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are unnatural, they are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God doesn’t not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.
Experiencing same-sex attraction—me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay—is a result of the Fall, as I’ve already shared

Yet being gay—experiencing same-sex attraction—is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold my attractions against me.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls.






Did God make me gay?
If God protected us from the consequences of our actions and the actions of others, would we really have choice?
God seeks to redeem all brokenness for our good and His glory (Romans 8:28) 
The Big Questions

[Notes]
We also do not choose who we are attracted to, but clearly we are gay, so at the very least, God allowed it.
So if it’s not what God intended and broken, but God allowed it and it’s not His will to change it for the vast majority of people, how is that fair?
Remember our discussion of why bad things happen to innocent people and free process from earlier

Many may not find that explanation satisfying, but ultimately I am comforted by God’s promise in Romans 8:28.
God has been faithful to redeem my enduring same-sex attraction.
My faithfulness has glorified God, and following His wisdom has led to truer intimacy, deeper meaning, life-giving family, and more satisfying purpose.






Will you try to make me straight?
No proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change
Praying for change with any level of expectation is dangerous and unnecessary
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Third, a student might ask: Will you try to make me straight?

I’ve already mentioned that research demonstrates that 96% of people who participated in sexual orientation change efforts experienced ZERO change in their same-sex attractions
I want to be clear here what I mean by sexual orientation change efforts
These studies found that only 4% of people experienced even a small amount of enduring reduction in same-sex attractions
Now, do some of those 96% experience the same level of same-sex sexual temptations but at the same time grow their capacity to resist temptation?
Certainly!
And do some of those experience naturally declining libido due to age? Sure.
But that’s different than a promise that if one prays hard enough or tries hard enough in counseling, God will miraculously eliminate their same-sex attractions completely every time
Even worse, not only are sexual orientation change efforts ineffective
But the same studies found that attempting to change one’s sexual orientation doubled their risk of suicide
Why?
I’ve known too many gay friends and counseling clients who were told to pray for a miracle and reassured that God is good and He will heal them
but then when change never came, their belief in God collapsed
Or they believed God hated them
Or that they were cursed
That they were unworthy of love
And perhaps suicide was better than being cursed, hated by God, and loved by no one

Now, some of you you have people in your family who are gay who you love deeply
you want them to know Jesus and follow Jesus and honor Jesus with their life
And it would certainly be simpler, easier if how all of this worked was that gay people just had to ask God to make them straight
Ask God to heal them of the same-sex attractions
And then it was healed

but, unfortunately, those scientific studies show that maybe 1 out of 25 times, someone who earnestly prays for sexual orientation change ends up experiencing it
now, maybe up in the states we don’t believe in the power of the Holy Spirit enough
maybe here in Ecuador, when people ask the Holy Spirit to remove their same-sex attractions, it happens more often
Let’s say that miracle happens 1 out of 10 times

Even if that were true, what about the other 9 out of 10?
who desperately want that healing
but for reasons beyond our understanding, it isn't God's plan to heal them
What is God offering them? And how would you respond to them?

to be clear, when God choose not to change someone’s sexual orientation, that doesn’t mean God is giving them permission to go marry someone of the same sex
Gay sex is still a sin in any context, regardless of whether there is healing

No, instead God invites those 9 out of 10 who don’t experience miraculous healing
to follow Jesus by refraining from same-sex romantic or sexual relationships
yet connecting deeply with other believers in non-romantic, non-sexual ways
as their same-sex attraction continue
and they daily resist those temptations

i know that sounds difficult
i know that if your child or niece was one of those 9 out of 10
who had to daily resist those temptation to honor Jesus
You’d do anything to save them from that struggle
But the reality is, most Christians who experience same-sex attraction won’t experience miraculous healing
and will have to resist these temptations for the rest of their life

and they are going to need your help
your support
yet too often, when those 9 out of 10 share about how they’ve tried and tried to become straight but its not worked
and ask loved ones to hold them and cry with them and help them do that daily work of resisting temptation
Too many loved ones respond by doubting whether they really tried hard enough
by turning them away and telling them to pray more

what do you think that's going to do to that 9 out of 10?
who have already spend 5 years or a decade praying and hoping and trying?
When you push them away and doubt that they’re really tried hard enough?
the Enemy is going to use your reject them to tempt them
He’s going to whisper in their ears that it's impossible, unfair, that everyone is against them
so they might as well just give up on Jesus and do what feels good

you don't want that, right?!
So what's the best way for us to keep the Enemy from that?
believe them when they tell you that they’ve prayed for healing
And instead of doubting them or shaming them
Offer them hope
That even though this brokenness might endure, God can use it
Just like in the story of the thorn in Paul’s side in 2 Corinthians 12
God doesn’t promise to always heal our brokenness on this side of heaven
But he does promise to find a way to use our enduring brokenness to bring purpose and goodness to our life
And to bring glory to God
Give them hope that God will go that if they faithfully resist temptations and ask God how He wants to use their brokenness







Where is God in all of this?
Reassure that God is not surprised or waiting for orientation change (Psalm 139)
Be honest with God—He can take it
Reject shame as a barrier to intimacy
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Fourth, a student might ask: Where is God in all of this?

For many gay people, we felt shame before God about our sexuality at an early age
Then we tried to hide our sexuality from God so that we felt less shame
Then the Bible and prayer were used as weapons by Christians trying to make us straight
And then when we realized that we did nothing to bring our sexual orientation about, we couldn’t do anything to change it, and God didn’t respond to our pleas for Him to change it,
we were angry at God for allowing us to be gay and not relieving us of this burden
All of this combines to leave gay students feeling like God is far away
They desperately want to feel close to God, but they don’t know how anymore

How can we help students reconnect with God?

First, we can reassure them that God is not surprised, and He sees them as valuable (Psalm 139)
Reassure them that they don’t have to become straight for God to love them
We are all broken and accepted before a gracious and merciful God who will never abandon us

Second, encourage them to be honest with themselves and God—God can take it
I was really angry with God but suppressed that anger for a decade
Finally, I had a mentor who encouraged me to be honest
Jacob wrestling God—it is intimate
I had to express that anger before I could believe that God loves me—and honestly, I am still working through that

Third, help them clear out the shame that has become a barrier to connecting with God
Shame is Satan’s primary weapon in many experiences that involve secrecy and particularly those that are sexual in nature.
Respond to that shame by helping the individual identify and reject shaming messages they tell themselves and hear from others.
And then help them replace those shame messages with true messages from Scripture about how God sees us
Plus, people may find relief from shame when they share their stories with others.
Particularly when I was first starting to share my story, it was scary, but each time I shared, each time there were less people I had to hide from
And each time those I shared with responded with love and care
The shame just melted away

In contrast, when we tell people to hide their attractions, not to talk about them, not to find community with people like them who understand their story,
We heap on the shame



Share



Which of these questions/conversations would you feel most comfortable engaging in? Most uncomfortable? Why?
1:53

[Notes]
 






Can I call myself gay?
Practice term-mirroring as hospitality
Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior
Create space for Christians to use the work gay
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Fifth, a student may ask: Can I call myself gay?

Particularly in conversation with LGBT+ non-Christians or when first meeting LGBT+ Christians,choose to mirror their terminology as an act of hospitality.
Instead of letting language be an early barrier to conversation, ask them what words they use to describe themselves,
ask what those words mean to them, and then choose to use those words with those definitions in conversation.
This doesn’t mean you’re affirming their use of that word or that definition.
Rather, you’re choosing to defer to them in that space so that you can focus on much more important topics.

Conflation of attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior is often a source of disagreement about language.
Instead, distinguish between the four different aspects of sexuality, like we discussed earlier

Next, create space for students to use the word “gay.”
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage.
There is no perfect term for ministering to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay young adults in your ministry, and straight culture warriors among your donors and alumni.
I choose the word most effective with gay teens and young adults and then make clear what I mean.

I think it’s important to distinguish between using the word “gay” phenomenologically versus ontologically.
I am using “gay” phenomenologically, not ontologically.
When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based one one’s experience or what it appears to be.
In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design.
When I use the word “gay,” I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay.
I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay.
I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same sex, and using the word “gay” is, in my opinion, the best word to describe that experience.

Finally, when I use the word “gay,'“ I am ultimately taking advantage of an opportunity to share the gospel.
I say, “I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
With this, I communicate that I am a child of God, first and foremost.
Jesus, and Jesus alone, sits on the throne of my life.
And I experience same-sex attraction.
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world.
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences.
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences.
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences.
I use the word “gay” to identify with people, not to identify with sin.
I call myself a gay Christian committed to a traditional sexual ethic to testify to God’s wisdom and goodness






 What do I do with my loneliness?
Ask, “What do you really need?”
Normalize intimacy needs
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Recognize meeting intimacy needs in healthy ways as an important spiritual discipline
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Sixth, a student might ask: What do I do with my loneliness

First, you can respond by asking them what they really need?
Do they really need something sexual or romantic?
Or do they need someone to talk, someone they know will be home when they get home, someone to celebrate with, someone to hold them when they cry
Often when we describe what we really need, its rarely something exclusively romantic or sexual

Next, normalize having intimacy needs, needing other people
If Jesus, the author and perfector of our faith needed the angels to attend to him in the wilderness and begged his disciples to stay up with him and pray with him before he was taken away—if our savior was a human with intimacy needs, its okay for us to have needs, its normal

Then recognize that if they don’t meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways, their broken flesh will reach out for unsatisfying and destructive alternatives
Therefore, proactively meeting their intimacy needs in healthy ways is an important part of taking care of their temple
As Christians who reject spirit-body dualism, we need to embrace that taking care of our body is just as important as taking care of our soul
So our intimacy needs aren’t something to be ignored, they are something to be fulfilled






 What do I do with my loneliness?
Same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
Seek healthy relationships with safe friends

The Big Questions

[Notes]
Next, we can point out that same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
This doesn’t mean that if I meet all of my intimacy needs today, I won’t be gay tomorrow
But I have seen that when I’m getting what I really need—healthy friendship with other men—my desires for something romantic or sexual are easier to dismiss

So encourage those you disciple to seek out healthy relationships with safe friends
My life got better when I stopped ignoring my loneliness and started meeting my needs in healthy ways with deep friendship
And to this day, if I am struggling with lust, instead of shaming myself, I want my first response to be asking myself whether I have been meeting my intimacy needs in healthy ways (which I haven’t)
And then taking practical steps

I think some of this question isn’t just “what can I do with my loneliness today?”
But also, “how do I keep from being lonely in my 40s, 50s, and so on?”
To answer that, lets move to the last big question






 What future can I hope for?
A lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship
Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world
Obedience to God’s teachings and surrendering our brokenness to God will bring goodness (Jeremiah 7:23)
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Seventh, students might ask: What future can I hope for?

For gay people like me who have been stewarding our sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic for awhile, particularly in vocational singleness, this is our biggest question
We can white-knuckle our way through celibacy for a couple of years
But after awhile its exhausting to walk out a vocation with often little support from our church, family, or friends
Plus as we age, our friends get married, have kids, and don’t have time or space for us in their lives
We’re tired of hearing pastors tell us, “Jesus can be everything you need,” when those pastors don’t live that life
Those pastors have a spouse and kids to go home to every night

So, what future can gay Christian hope for?

First, we can recognize that all people are called to a lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship, whether they are gay or straight.

Second, we can highlight that individuals shouldn’t focus their long-term goals on eliminating same-sex attraction.
Instead, we can encourage those we serve to make sense of their sexuality and grow in sexual stewardship,
but ultimately encourage them to seek fulfillment in intimacy with God and His family and meaningful work to redeem Creation
***opportunities no less available to those who experience same-sex attraction
--That’s what we’re really made for!

Plus, remind them that obedience to God’s teachings about sexual stewardship
and surrendering our brokenness to God
will bring increasing goodness in our lives (Jeremiah 7:23).









 What future can I hope for?
God invites everyone to vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
In communities that have become places where gay people can thrive according to God’s wisdom, both are equally good and available to gay people
The Big Questions

[Notes]
What kind of relationships is God offering gay students?
Well, God invites everyone to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Including gay people
In communities that have become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic,
both Christian marriage and vocational singleness are equally good and available to those who experience same-sex attraction.

But there in lies the problem
I’ve never met a Christian community that is a place where gay people can thrive—with reasonable effort—according to a traditional sexual ethic
If we’re being honest, most of our communities aren’t places that can offer gay people much hope right now
The best way you can answer this question is by being honest
For most of you, an honest answer is,
“I wish this weren’t the case, but our community has been doing a poor job of supporting single and gay people for awhile.
I wish I could promise you that that will get better soon, but I can’t.
The cross you’ll bear will probably be more painful than many of your peers.
I am sorry.
The world is not supposed to be this way.
Our community is not supposed to be this way.
So I personally give you permission to hold my feet to the fire on this. Don’t stop reminding me that things must be different, and quickly.”

And finally after you apologize, affirm their need for committed, intimate community
God isn’t asking them to give up deep friendships
Even if they’re called to vocational singleness, that’s still a call to family in the body of Christ
and loving other people deeply for a lifetime
Cast a vision for that
And coach them through developing deep, healthy, intimate friendships







Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first

Don’t get stuck in emotionally-loaded arguments. Instead, ask “Does a God exist? Does that God know what’s best for you better than you do? Had that God revealed Himself to us through the Scriptures and the Church?”
Winsome witness?

[Notes]
Topline: if the gay student you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a traditional sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a traditional sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned them to loneliness if committed to celibacy.

Because of that pain, getting stuck in emotionally-loaded arguments about sexual ethics won’t convince them of the goodness of God's wisdom

Instead, go back to those more more fundamental questions about whether God exists
Whether that God knows what’s best for us better than we do
And whether that God has revealed Himself to us through the Scriptures and the Church

And in the meantime, lean into the Academy’s vision for caring for LGBT+ students



Share



Which of these questions/conversations would you feel most comfortable engaging in? Most uncomfortable? Why?
2:20

[Notes]
 



COMING OUT


[Notes]
I want to close with some universal wisdom for how to respond compassionately when a student shares with you about their sexuality
Regardless of different opinions on sexual ethics, here’s how to respond in ways that builds trust and relationship






Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a progressive sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex romance

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.
When someone shares

[Notes]
Well first, let’s define what it means for someone to come out

Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.
But often teens and preteens coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics.
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.







Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. Students share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

When someone shares

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.






Avoid words/phrases like
Homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve
When someone shares

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual",
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as inflammatory and unsafe.







Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons
When someone shares

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
Don't share their story with others without their permission.
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.







Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.
When someone shares

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Embody Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try using whatever words they use in the ways they use them as an act of hospitality.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”






Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When someone shares

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed), make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.






Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When someone shares

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.

Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?






What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?
When someone shares

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try starting with these:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for the *very first* conversations. If you already have or enter into a discipleship relationship with the student, you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship. But remember, resistance to a traditional sexual ethic is much more about either (1) not believing a God really exists, (2) not believing that God really knows what’s best for us better than we do, or (3) not believing that we know who that God is by reading the Scriptures with the Church historic

How do you have those ongoing discipleship questions? Start by exploring those three fundamental questions, slowly walk through sexual stewardship for all people, and make space for 7 common LGBT-specific questions that we covered earlier



QUESTIONS?

