






connection in community





this week’s
plan



participating well



talking to
adults




Teachers eager to support you
David Saavedra
Tere Toledo
Karen Mosquera
Julie Marcum
Rebecca Estes
Jonathan Minchala
Moni Gamboa
Chris Wimer

To meet w/ Pieter Tue-Fri during 6th period or after school, ask Ms. Paty






connection in community



[Notes]
over the next couple of days, we’re going to be talking about connection in community
but I want to make sure that I address the topics that are relevant to you



hi, I’m pieter

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I'm a professional counselor based in the states
so I spend some of my days meeting one-on-one with Christians struggling with fear, sadness, anger, or loneliness
We often talk about faith and sexuality
some of them are single and some of them are married

I also teach at schools and churches about Jesus,
about how much Jesus loves us,
and about His advice for how we can all enjoy more community in our lives

I'll share more of my story throughout our conversations over the next few days
but when I was in middle school, I started noticing that people were attractive
started feeling pulled magnetically to some people
started feeling this gravitational force toward some people
but maybe like some of you, I realized that I was drawn to both girls my age and to other guys my age
often more to guys than to girls, but ultimately I was drawn to both

and at the same time, I was (and still am) a Christian
I really believed that Jesus had the best advice for how I can best enjoy community with people

skip forward about 15 years later
after I graduated college, I was still a Christian
I was still convinced that Jesus had the best advice for what to do with my capacity and need for connection in community
and I was still attracted to both girls and guys
but I had this sense from the Holy Spirit that I wasn't supposed to just take whichever I wanted between marriage and singleness
I had a sense, instead, that I was supposed to ask Jesus how He wanted me to live my life

I specifically asked Jesus whether it would be personally better for me to pursue Christian marriage with a woman
or better for me to permanently give up dating, romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
to instead fully focus on serving the poor and the needy around me with all of my attention

a few years later, I was confident that Jesus was calling me to that committed, lifetime singleness for the sake of serving others
but I still needed connection in the context of community
I still needed family
so I reached out to some other Christian guys committed to singleness for Jesus
and we started an intentional Christian community together called the Nashville Family of Brothers
where we do life together as a family
and will eventually make lifetime commitments to doing life as a family
but there's nothing romantic or sexual about our family
we're just friends, committed to each other as a family, like Jesus's disciples

As I said, I'll share more about my story as we get to know each other
but first
I'm curious what your assumptions are about connection and community



activity

[Notes]
To explore that, I’m gonna share with you some questions to think about over the next few days.
Just listen to these questions and notice what your gut reactions are:




If you were dating someone, would you rather get chocolate or flowers as a gift?



Do you think people need romance to be happy?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think people need to have children to be happy?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think we all need some kind of long-term family in the same house?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think God has advice for the best ways we connect and seek family?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Would you trust God's wisdom, even if it were different than what you wanted to be true?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think there will be romance and marriage in heaven?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




If you were married and had a good relationship with Jesus, would you still get lonely sometimes?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Can friendships protect you from loneliness just as well as marriage?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Have you felt burdened by sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, or just being tired sometime in the past month?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Who did you turn to for help? Your friends? Parents? Jesus? Boyfriend/girlfriend? No one?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?

okay, you can go back to your seats





connection in community…
how God made us
what’s broken
broken, but connected


[Notes]
over the next couple of days, we're going to spend some time together talking about
connection in community
you see, God made all of us for connection in the context of community.

He first made the world perfectly and imagined all of us connecting with each other in community.
And He gave us two best ways, two different but equally good paths for enjoying connection:
vocational singleness and Christian marriage.

But unfortunately humans have consistently chosen to ignore God's wisdom and trust their own ideas over God's,
leading to brokenness in every part of the world and ourselves.

Thankfully, God looked over our broken world and broken selves,
and He shared with us in the teachings of Jesus and others
warnings about what will cause us harm and to avoid those
plus wisdom about the best ways we can still enjoy connection in community
Plus, He gave us the Holy Spirit and each other
to lean on when we're trying to avoid harmful things and seek life-giving things




how God
made us

[Notes]
So let's start with the basics:
God created you for connection in the context of community




God created you for connection in community
How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.


[Notes]
How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.

God is a being in community.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a community called the Trinity.
Then when Jesus died on the cross for our sins and resurrected, He made a way for all of us to join the Trinity in God’s family. You see, God enjoys perfect connection in the Trinity, and while Christians don’t always love God perfectly, He loves us perfectly in the big family of God.
Because we’re made in God’s image, designed to imitate God, we’re also made for connection in communities.




sexuality =

our need to be in community

+ our capacity to connect with other humans


[Notes]
We call our need to be in community, our capacity to connect with other humans, “sexuality.”

You see, often when people talk about sexuality, they use that word narrowly to only refer to romance and sex.
But there's so much more to our sexuality than just romance and sex.
Even if God calls you to Christian marriage and to enjoy romance and sex in that context,
you'll spend at least the first couple decades of your life unmarried and you might end up spending the last decade or two of your life unmarried, as a widow.
Others of you will never marry.





Even if you get married, most of your connection will be non-romantic and nonsexual


[Notes]
And even if you get married, your spouse will just be one of many people you'll interact with each day. You’ll interact with coworkers, friends, any children you have, and other family members.
Do you see what I'm getting at?
Regardless of whether you get married, most of your interactions with other people in your life will be non-romantic and non-sexual,
yet those interactions will still be meaningful connection.
When God made us to be relational creatures,
He intended for most of our connections with each other, most of the times we engage our sexuality, to be non-romantic and non-sexual.




activityover a lifetime, what % alone w/ spouse vs other?

[Notes]
I'm curious, do you agree with me that even if you get married,
you'll spend more of your waking hours with other friends or in mixed company with friends and your spouse than just with your spouse alone?
If someone gets married, what percentage of their waking hours do you think they spend alone with their spouse?

Okay, let's calculate this together, shall we?
How would we do that?
Maybe we should break it up by decades?
And average hour per day you’d spend awake just with your spouse versus in mixed-company?

0 - 25 (16 F)
25 - 65 (1 R, 10 F, 2 F, 3 R)
65 - 80 (8 R, 8 F)
80 - 90 (16 F)
F: [25x16 + 40x12 + 15x8 +10x16]x365 = 423,400
R: [40x4 + 15x8]x365 = 280 = 102,200
so only about 20% of your life spent alone with your spouse



how God
made us

[Notes]
So how can we think more broadly about sexuality and our created need and capacity for connection in the context of community?




our sexuality is…
our need to know others and be known
our need to give and receive love, including friend love


[Notes]
More generally, our sexuality is our need to know others and be known by others.
Like you know how you know what some of your friends' favorite foods and songs are?
And how you want to have friends who know what your favorite foods and songs are?
Our sexuality is our need to give and receive love. But I'm not just talking about romantic love.
This also includes brotherly and sisterly love. Friend love.
Like when you're having a bad day and your friend knows exactly how to cheer you up.
Or when you accomplished something you've been working toward for months, and your friend is the first person you text,
because they'll be more excited for you than anyone else.



activity
check all that apply

[Notes]
I’m curious how many of you have friends who you connect with regularly in meaningful ways
that are still non-romantic?
you’ve got this checklist of different ways some people connect with their friends
take some some time and quietly fill out this survey
check next to each one that’s true for you
and then tally up how many boxes you checked, and write that number at the bottom of the page

okay, so I’m curious, how many of you checked 15?
…count down
wow, so everyone has a friend who they can connect with in at least…
it’s that cool how we can get so much from friendship without the need for romance?!




we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection
We have physical bodies + intellectual minds + emotional/spiritual soul, so we need connection on each of those levels


[Notes]
But here's the key: we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection.
And the Bible never promises romance or sex to people who follow God.
Let me explain.

One way to think about our needs for connection is to imagine a set of buckets that need to be filled with water.
Each of the buckets represent a kind of connection we need and the water is the connection.
Because we each have a physical body and an intellectual mind and an emotional and spiritual soul,
God designed us to need and have connection on a physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual level.





physical
intellectual
emotional
spiritual

[Notes]
Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.”





emotional connection = having convos that help you connect w/ gladness, fear, anger, or sadness in you (or others)

[Notes]
When I say emotional connection, I mean having conversations that help you connect with gladness or fear or anger or sadness inside of you, and where you notice some of those same things in others.





spiritual connection = connecting that makes you feel more connected to God (talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, worshiping together)


[Notes]
When I say spiritual connection, I mean connecting in a way that makes you feel more connected to God, by talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, or worshiping together.





physical connection = hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, etc.

[Notes]
When I say physical connection, I mean a hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, and yes, kissing and cuddling and sex.





intellectual connection = exchanging and exploring ideas with another person

[Notes]
When I say intellectual connection, I mean exchanging and exploring ideas with another person.





physical
intellectual
emotional
spiritual

[Notes]
Now some would argue that there is a fifth bucket labeled “sexual.”
That we all need sexual connection to be whole, and if we don’t get it, we will feel empty.
But I know plenty of people who have never had sex and who are full adults.
They share with me that they have vibrant social lives, rich connection, and a satisfying experience of community.

That’s been true in my own life.
The healthy emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual connection I have experienced in friendships has been much more satisfying than the broken physical connection I have experienced in the past.
In contrast, I’ve known lots of single people who haven't followed God's wisdom and have had sex outside of marriage.
But despite the beautiful photos they post on instagram
When I talk to them one-on-one, they share with me that they feel empty.
That it's fun in the moment, but they're always living in fear of the person leaving 
or they’re afraid to let the other person really know them because they might break up tomorrow.

so no, we don't need romance or sex to be happy or whole people




the Bible doesn’t teach that we need marriage/sex or promise them
Jesus didn’t have sex. 
Paul was committed to celibacy (and many Christian leaders in the past 2000 years)
Matthew 22:30 says there won’t be marriage/sex in heaven.


[Notes]
Plus, the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or romance to be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Jesus is the example of what it means to be fully human, so clearly romance and sex aren’t necessary to be fully human.
Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the early leaders in the Church were celibate.
And in Matthew 22:30, Jesus suggests that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex because the non-romantic, non-sexual ways we'll connect with God and each other will be 1000 times better than any romance or sex in this life





physical
intellectual
emotional
spiritual

[Notes]
Instead, there are four connection buckets. Emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual.
God provides a good chunk of our spiritual connection.
Those who are married will partially fill each of those buckets with the connection they experience in their marriage.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t fill your connection buckets.
You will still need emotional connection, intellectual connection, physical connection, and spiritual connection from friendship.



activityhow could you fill your buckets in healthy ways this week?

[Notes]
I’m curious, how full have your healthy connection buckets felt this past week?
you’ve got a handout with the definitions of each kind of connection
and then four buckets labeled with each kind of connection
go through and shade in how much of each of those buckets you feel like you’ve filled this past week
then take a minute to list some steps you could take this upcoming week to fill your connection buckets in healthy ways even more!

3 min pair and share

2 min then ask anyone if they’re willing to share anything they noticed
or steps they want to take in the future



how God
made us

[Notes]
So God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?





*how* can we connect in community?
God designed two best ways for Christians to enjoy connection in the context of community:
Vocational Singleness
Christian marriage


[Notes]
So God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?

In short, God has designed two paths for Christians to do that,
and He wants to give some of us the gift to walk down one of those paths and others the gift to walk down the other path:
Vocational singleness and Christian marriage
both of these are particular ways adult Christians can enjoy connection in the context of community



activity

[Notes]
but before we talk about godly singleness and godly marriage, I’m curious what
you heard growing up
based on what you're heard from church, parents, friends…



what did you hear growing up about…godly singleness/marriage? advice/boundaries?

[Notes]
what do you think Godly singleness is like?
what do you think Godly marriage is like?
what wisdom/boundaries does God have?
what advice do you think He has to have better singleness/marriages?
Always give think time, then give time to pair and share, then share with larger group

2 min reflect
3 min pair&share
XXX2 min share outXXX




Christian marriage is…
a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man to enjoy connection, raising children for Jesus, and mirror the Trinity/Jesus+Church 


[Notes]
for thousands of years, Christians have understood Christian marriage to be
a marriage joined, entered into, and sustained by God
to be a lifetime commitment
between one Christian woman and one Christian man
for the purposes of enjoying connection with each other, raising children to become Christ-followers,
and mirroring some of the qualities in the Trinity and between Christ's relationship with the Church in unique ways




Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, & life-giving to remind us that
God will never abandon us
there is beautiful differentness in the Trinity & between Jesus+Church
the Trinity & Jesus+Church are life-sustaining





[Notes]
in particular, it's important that Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, and life-giving.

Christian marriages are supposed to be for a lifetime. There are very few grounds for Biblical divorce and remarriage.
This faithfulness in Christian marriage is supposed to remind us that God will never abandon us.

Christian marriages are supposed to be complimentary. The complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically in Christian marriage
are supposed to point back to the different-ness in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

And Christian marriage are supposed to be a space for raising children,
pointing us back to the life-giving nature of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church.
Note that I said raise children. God designed Christian marriage to be a space to raise children,
whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents.
While infrequent, there are some married couples who won’t raise children in their home.




Vocational singleness is…
a lifetime calling to give up romance, dating, marriage, sex, & biological children to fully focus on caring for the poor/needy


[Notes]
but Christian marriage isn't the only best path God gave us to enjoy connection in the context of community

Jesus also invited his followers to consider vocational singleness
What is “vocational singleness”?
Vocational singleness is a kind of singleness that involves permanently giving up romance, dating, marriage, sex, and biological children
to instead use all of your time and energy to care for the poor and needy




Vocational singleness gives us hope…
for heaven where we’ll be loved & belong without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection


[Notes]
this vocational singleness is still a call to enjoy connection in the context of community
and when vocational singles live in intentional Christian community, finding family without the need for romance or sex,
vocational singleness is supposed to give all of us hope for heaven 
Remember how we won’t need marriage and sex anymore in heaven?
But we’ll have better connection than we’ve ever experienced on this side of heaven?
When vocational singles live together as a family without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection
that can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love
by previewing a time when we won’t have to compete
—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—
in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.

I've accepted a call to vocational singleness
and I’ve found family in an intentional Christian community in the States
7 of us live in a house together,
gather for a quick time of prayer before work each morning,
have family dinners three nights a week,
go on vacations together.
and alternate Christmases with our brotherhood and our biological families,
all while we're trying to figure out what kind of kingdom work God is calling each of us to,
and while we each discern whether we're called to commit to this brotherhood for a lifetime.
Plus, I’m super grateful for the ways God uses my availability in singleness:
I’m a proud godfather and blessed with the responsibility of helping his parents
raise him (and his siblings) to be faithful Christian disciples.
I'm a licensed professional counselor and I get to help people make sense of big questions of faith and family
I'm humbled God has used me to start a ministry that helps pastors and parents
teach their churches and kids the kind of stuff we're talking about here.
And I'm grateful to get to be a part of building that intentional Christian community
with the other men in the Nashville Family of Brothers and offer lifelong family to people who are lonely.
All of that is made possible by my availability in vocational singleness,




okay, but what about now?
uncommitted singleness to enjoy friendship & deepen your relationship with Jesus
eventually ask God whether vocational singleness or Christian marriage would be better for you


[Notes]
you might notice that none of you are in either of these yet, right?
none of you are married
and none of you have made a commitment to vocational singleness
instead, right now you're in a period of singleness that comes before either of those
an uncommitted singleness
and one day, probably in your 20s, you can take a few months or years to pray
and ask God whether it'd be better for you to step into Christian marriage or commit to vocational singleness
but in the meantime, you're still called to connection in the context of community!
that involves you enjoying friendship with each other and deepening your relationship with Jesus



how God
made us

[Notes]
okay, so God made all of us for connection in the context of community
He gave us two best ways to enjoy that: vocational singleness and Christian marriage
and while you aren't going down either of those paths yet
God is still inviting you to enjoy connection in the context of community today
to enjoy friendship with each other and Jesus
and to look forward to the day when you get to figure out whether you're called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage



what’s
broken

[Notes]
but there's a problem
the world isn't the way it was meant to be
after God made the world and humans perfectly
He gave the two first humans, Adam and Eve, freedom to make their own choices
to choose to love and obey God
or to make other choices
and unfortunately, Adam and Eve eventually chose not to love God and to ignore His wisdom
and their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness
like a contagion, a virus going through a computer or across a city
everything became a little off
a little bent from the way God first designed and ordered things perfectly




this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first intended


[Notes]
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us



activitywhat do you notice that’s broken about the world?

[Notes]
what do you notice that’s broken about the world
you can just blurt these out



what’s
broken

[Notes]
that's why there's disease and poverty and natural disasters and drought and famine and war

this contagion of brokenness also affected each of our sexualities
each of our needs and capacities for connection in the context of community have been bent
each of our sexualities are broken




broken sexuality leads to loneliness
our brokenness keeps us from connecting perfectly with God & each other
but we can still meet a lot of our needs for connection in healthy ways


[Notes]
One way broken sexuality impacts everyone of us, is that we experience loneliness
Isaiah 59:2 says that our sins, our imperfection, our unwise choices have separated us from God and each other.
Because this world is broken and we are broken, we can’t connect perfectly with God or each other.
There’s this distance because of brokenness that we can never cross.
Some amount of loneliness is a part of life. It is unavoidable.
So should we just give up and stop trying to connect in healthy ways? No!
For starters, even if we can’t meet all of our needs fully and finally, we can still get a lot of what we need.
We can still enjoy rich, satisfying connection with God and other people in this life.




2. broken bodies make it difficult to connect in community

3. sometimes we choose to connect in broken ways that hurt


[Notes]
Second, as a result, there are some ways that our physical bodies are broken that get in the way of how God intended for us to connect in community
that isn't our fault
but is still off, bent, broken
And third, there are some ways people chose to connect in broken ways that hurt themselves
or hurt others
in the short term or long term




sexual brokenness – your body is broken or someone hurts you

sexual temptation – you’re invited to sin, but haven’t said “yes” yet

sexual sin – you say “yes” to temptation, hurt another or disobey God


[Notes]
Ohh, and I want to clearly distinguish between three different things and what I mean when I use the phrases
sexual brokenness
sexual temptation
and sexual sin

I mentioned ways our bodies might be broken or that the choices of others might hurt us
when it relates to sexuality, some people would call those sexual brokenness
notice that when you experience sexual brokenness, you haven’t done anything wrong
you didn’t choose for things to be that way
those might make your life more difficult, but you didn’t do anything wrong

then you might personally be tempted to do sexual things that harm yourself or another
you might feel like something inside of you or outside of you is inviting you to disobey God’s wisdom
that is called sexual temptation
but I want to be clear, it’s not a sin to be tempted
even Jesus was tempted
we can resist temptation by saying “no”
that’s what Jesus did every time he was tempted
we only cross over from temptation to actual sin
to actually doing something wrong
when we say “yes” to that temptation my fantasizing further or saying something sexual or doing something sexual

which brings us to the third phrase
if you personally choose to do sexual things that harm yourself or another
if you personally choose to disobey God’s wisdom
in your thoughts, with your words, or with some action,
then you have sinned
then you have done something wrong
that’s called sexual sin

but again, I want to reiterate
if you’ve just experience sexual brokenness or sexual temptation
but you haven’t personally chosen to sin
then you’ve not done anything wrong
there’s nothing you need to feel guilty about
and sexual brokenness and sexual temptation are not your fault




God has given us wisdom and help
the Bible shows us what pain to avoid and what life-giving things to enjoy
God gave us the Holy Spirit and each other to lean on in the midst of brokenness


[Notes]
thankfully, God looked at the world, all of it now bent and broken
and He offered us wisdom in His Scriptures about broken things to avoid and best things to enjoy
He noticed what things would bring ourselves or others harm, and He warned us to avoid those
and He noticed what was still good about His designs for connection in community, vocational singleness, and Christian marriage,
and He urged us to continue seeking those things

and He doesn't expect us to do that alone
He gave us the Holy Spirit to help us know what is true and follow God's wisdom
and He gave us each other, brothers and sisters in Christ, to help each other

so let's explore some of the ways our sexualities are broken and what God's wisdom for us is in light of the brokenness
but first



what’s
broken

[Notes]
there’s lots of ways our sexualities are broken
either because of our choices or the choices of others
and these different kinds of brokenness are unfortunately very common

I want to share with you some statistics, so you can see how common this stuff is,
and why at least a couple of these are relevant to all of us.

Plus, if you notice that some of these things are things you struggle with and you’re wondering whether you’re the only person,
I hope that you see that you aren’t.

Many people struggle with these same things.




how common is broken sexuality?
35% of people die before age 80, leaving a spouse widowed.
19% of hopeful mothers struggle with infertility.
33% of marriages end in divorce.
20% of spouses cheat on their spouse.
5% of people experience same-sex attraction.


[Notes]
so, according to statistics from across the globe,

35% of people die before age 80, leaving a spouse widowed.
19% of hopeful mothers struggle with infertility. That’s when people who want to get pregnant have trouble doing so because of some brokenness in their body or their partner’s body.
33% of marriages end in divorce.
20% of spouses cheat on their spouse. That when a person in a marriage have sex with someone who isn’t their spouse.
5% of people experience same-sex attraction. That’s when a person finds themselves romantically or sexually attracted to people of the same biological sex.




how common is broken sexuality?
1% of people experience gender incongruence.
85% of people struggle with masturbation.
75% of people struggle with pornography.
80% of people struggle with crossing sexual boundaries with a girlfriend/boyfriend.
2% of women have had an abortion.


[Notes]
1% of people experience gender incongruence. That’s when someone experiences a painful mismatch between their internal sense of being a boy or a girl compared to what their physical, biological sex is.
95% of people struggle with masturbation.
75% of people struggle with pornography.
80% of people struggle with crossing sexual boundaries with a girlfriend/boyfriend.
2% of women have had an abortion.

as I’ve already explained, some of these are sexual brokenness that isn’t anyone’s fault
some of these are sexual brokenness one person experiences because of the decisions of others
some of these are sexual temptations that we can still choose to resist
and some of these are sexual sin that people have chosen to commit

but all of these are ways the brokenness of the world around us and the brokenness in ourselves
gets in the way of us perfectly enjoying connection in community



what’s
broken

[Notes]
so let’s talk about these
first I want to talk about some manifestations of broken sexuality that you probably haven't experienced directly
but one if not multiple of these might have impacted you indirectly
maybe a family member or a friend's family




broken sexuality: widowing
God didn’t intend for people we love to die
One effect of brokenness is that some people die too early


[Notes]
some people experience pain from widowing
God didn't intend for any of us to lose family members
to lose key people who we connect with in the context of community
but one of the effects of the fall is death
and death too early 
maybe one of your grandparents died earlier than expected, leaving your other grandparent painfully alone
or maybe one of your parents tragically died too young, leaving you and your other parent painfully alone
that's one way sexuality is broken




broken sexuality: adultery
God intended for married people to be faithful
Some selfishly choose to cheat, hurting spouses and kids


[Notes]
adultery is another manifestation of broken sexuality
God intended for married people to be faithful to each other
and only be engage romantically and sexually with their spouse
but out of selfishness, people sometimes cheat on their spouse
betraying their spouse and failing to keep their commitment
leading to pain and sadness
and that pain and sadness can impact the kids in a marriage







connection in community






broken sexuality: divorce
God intended for marriage to be lifetime
Some ignore God’s wisdom and divorce, harming spouses and kids


[Notes]
adultery sometimes leads to another kind of broken sexuality: divorce
God intended for marriage couples to stay together for a lifetime
but some people ignore God's wisdom and abandon their marriage commitments
in ways that hurt their spouse and any kids they've had together
some of your might have parents or marriages close to you that ended in divorce
splitting families in painful ways
If your parents are divorced, it makes sense to be sad
You can ask Jesus or your friends or your teacher for help
And if the parents of one of your friends are divorced, be extra kind to them




broken sexuality: abortion
God intended for sex in marriage to be enjoyable and open to raising children
Some want to use God’s gift of sex without accepting the responsibility, so they block God’s gift of children or kill the baby


[Notes]
abortion and contraception are other manifestations of broken sexuality
you see, God designed Christian sex to be an opportunity for married people to love each other
and to be open to God's gift of raising children
but some people want to use God's gift of sex without being willing to accept the responsibility of the outcomes of sex
so they use pills or barriers to block the possibility of having children
or worse, after a baby has already started growing inside a woman
they get surgery or take pills to kill the baby
instead of letting the baby live




broken sexuality: infertility
God intended for married Christians to be able to have children
But some bodies are broken such that they can’t have children


[Notes]
finally, the last manifestation of broken sexuality that you probably haven't experienced but I want to mention is infertility
God intended for Christian marrieds who are eager to raise children to be able to have children
but some people's bodies are broken
such that either because of something broken in the husband's body
or something broken in the wife's body
she's not able to get pregnant and deliver a healthy baby
leading to sadness when Christian marrieds who want to be parents can't have their own children
or even worse, when babies die in before they’re born, even though the mother did nothing wrong




why doesn’t God heal every time?
Sometimes God heals when we ask Him to.
But sometimes God doesn’t.
Why? How is that fair?


[Notes]
now some of you might ask, "why can't married christians just pray and ask God to heal their bodies so that they can have babies?"
they can
but a lot of married Christians pray for that but God chooses not to heal them in that way
why is that?
well, we know that sometimes God answers our prayers in the ways we ask
but sometimes He doesn't
every single one of us could probably name something important that we have prayed for
yet God chose not to give us what we asked for
not as a punishment or because God doesn't love us
but because that's just how God works
how is that fair?




so that our choices matter
God allows the consequences of human decisions to “play out” (even if painful) so that our choices mean something (including choices to love)


[Notes]
At the core of that question is the timeless question: Why do bad things happen to seemingly innocent people?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God usually lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
That’s the theological concept of free process.
If God stepped in every time and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choices?
No. 
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.




what about broken sexuality?
genetic brokenness all the way back to Adam+Eve and/or brokenness in environment growing up
God allows to preserve free will


[Notes]
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
Well, genetic brokenness that contributes to infertility are the downstream effects of generations of brokenness
going all the way back to Adam and Eve
Or maybe when that husband or wife were a kid, they were exposed to something that led to infertility
Whatever it was, to protect their free will and the free will of all of the other peoples' choices who directly and indirectly led to that infertility
over generations and generations,
God chose not to swoop in and prevent that infertility by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.




thankfully, God is faithful
God promises in Romans 8:28 that He will work with the brokenness to bring goodness to our lives


[Notes]
Thankfully Romans 8:28 promises that despite enduring brokenness in our lives,
God is faithful to work with us and those broken pieces, to bring goodness to our lives and glory to God
He looks at the broken pieces of our lives, whether that brokenness is our fault or someone else’s fault
And then He invites us along a path of using those broken pieces to make something beautiful
for example, some married Christians who struggle with infertility choose to adopt children instead
so despite the sadness that they can't bear biological children
they're able to be parents to kids that otherwise wouldn't have a parent
and out of their brokenness bring wholeness to others



activitywhy do you think bad things happen to innocent people?

[Notes]
so, what do you think about my explanation for why bad things happen to good people?
in summary, I argued that in order for us to have free will, God chooses to let the consequences of everyone’s decisions play out, most of the time
even if that leads to more pain
because of world of pain but real choice is better than a world of robots
For some, this is helpful because it means that God doesn’t mean for things to be the way they are.
He’s not a cruel being. He is good! He wants things to be much different.
But things are the way they are because humans have sinned.
That’s also scary.
Because it means that God isn’t micromanaging the world to make sure that nothing bad happens.
It’s up to us human to be faithful.
And if we aren’t, things will continue to be painful.
But at least it makes sense of the world, right?

but maybe you disagree?
maybe you want to point out a problem with that explanation? a way it’s unsatisfying?
or suggest a better or different explanation?
take 2 min to reflect on your own, and then I want us to have friendly debate, me versus the rest of yall
try to poke holes in my argument
and offer a better explanation
to be clear, I think there are multiple legitimate explanations, and I don’t think I’ve offer the only of even the best explanation

but doesn’t God intervene sometimes?
isn’t God always involved, at least in some way?
what if, while God didn’t introduce evil/brokenness into the world, God actually chooses what specific evil we will experience in the ways that will be best for us?
doesn’t everything happen for a purpose?
what if it’s just a mystery and we don’t know, but we do know that God is actively working to bring good to our lives and play not part in the evil?



what’s
broken

[Notes]
then there's other kinds of sexual brokenness that you may have experienced
that are brokennesses in a person's body
that people don't choose and aren't their fault
but still make life more difficult




broken sexuality: same-sex attraction
God intended for boys to be attracted to girls, girls attracted to boys
One effect of brokenness is some are attracted to people of the same sex


[Notes]
some people, like me, experience same-sex attraction
God intended for boys to be attracted to girls and for girls to be attracted to boys
but as some people go through puberty, they realize that they feel something different
some boys find themselves romantically attracted to other boys
and some girls find themselves romantically attracted to other girls




broken sexuality: same-sex attraction
It’s not their fault
God didn’t intend same-sex attractions



[Notes]
I want to be clear: this isn’t because those boys or girls did anything wrong
or because their parents did anything wrong
or because God intended for them to experience same-sex attraction
but, for whatever reason, the particular way their sexuality was affected by the brokenness of the world was that they developed these broken attractions
I realized my attractions when I was in middle school, and at first I was confused
and then I was upset because I didn't want to be different
and I was afraid that if my parents or friends found out, they might treat me differently




broken sexuality: same-sex attraction
God asks same-sex attracted Christians to resist temptation to be romantic/sexual with people of the same sex
AND, God still wants same-sex attracted Christians to connect in community


[Notes]
the Bible says that romantic and sexual activity with people of the same sex are sins
there isn't any context for that kind of connection that God says is best for us
so when people who experience same-sex attraction are tempted to engage romantically with other people of the same sex
God wants us to resist that temptation
merely experiencing temptation to same-sex romantic or sexual activity is not a sin
it’s a brokenness, but it’s not a sin
and God does not send people to Hell because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls
a same-sex attracted person only sins when they say “yes” to same-sex temptations by lusting in their mind or engaging romantically or sexually with someone of the same sex

now that doesn't mean that those Christians are supposed to be alone or live in fear of people they might be attracted to
remember, we're all still made for connection in the context of community
and there are meaningful ways we can all enjoy that in the non-romantic, non-sexual friendship
for awhile I worried that having these attractions and following Jesus would mean I'd be alone
but as I've already shared, God still wanted me to have family
so he helped me start the Nashville Family of Brothers
where I have just as much family as any married couple
just without the romance and sex




broken sexuality: same-sex attraction
People don’t choose who they’re attracted to
Change in attractions is a mystery and a miracle
God is faithful to redeem brokenness in other ways


[Notes]
some say same-sex attracted Christians should just choose not to experience same-sex attractions
But the consensus of scientists is that people don’t choose who they are attracted to
Instead, sexual attractions develop from a mixture of nature and nurture
From a mix of genetics and environmental factors in one’s home growing up
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.

Others say same-sex attracted Christains should ask God to change their attractions
God does have the power to completely remove someone’s same-sex attraction and give them robust opposite-sex attraction
and sometimes He does 
but change is mysterious and miraculous
much more often, God chooses not to completely change someone’s sexual orientation
Studies show that 96% of the time, when people try to change their attractions, they don’t experience much change in their attractions
BUT, we can experience change in our capacity to resist temptation
God has promised that if we lean into sanctification, He will help us build more strength to say “no” to same-sex attractions
Even if the frequency and the magnitude of the temptations persist
Okay, but why wouldn’t God completely change someone’s sexual orientation if they asked?
Well, remember our earlier conversation about infertility and how God lets bad things happen so that our choices matter?
that applies here too!

I think I developed same-sex attractions because of the broken decisions of others.
Maybe broken genetics as a manifestation of generational sin going all the way back to Adam and Eve,
Combined with some kind of brokenness in the home and community I grew up in that contributed.
But then to protect my free will and the free will of others, God chose not to swoop in, block the consequences of the decisions of others, and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions.
Thankfully, God has been faithful to redeem my enduring brokenness for His glory and my good.
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my sexuality
that I’ve experienced the most purpose and belonging in my life.




if you’re same-sex attracted…
Jesus loves you! He’s not surprised, and it’s not your fault. He still had good plans for you!
You don’t have to make sense of this alone: share with a trusted adult


[Notes]
if any of you also experience same-sex attraction, I want to share a couple of things
first, Jesus loves you
he's not surprised that you're same-sex attracted
It’s not your fault
and he still loves you deeply and has good plans for your life
second, you don't have to make sense of this alone
whether it's me or your teacher or one of your parents or a different adult,
please tell a trusted adult
and they'll just listen, and give you a hug
they'll reassure you that you didn't do anything wrong
and they can walk alongside you as you ask Jesus about the best ways to handle your attractions

And if any of you have friends who experience same-sex attraction, continue being a good friend and treat them like you would anyone else




broken sexuality: same-sex attraction
God didn’t intend same-sex attractions and same-sex romance/sex are sins
It isn’t their fault, complete change is rare
God asks us to trust his wisdom and enjoy non-romantic/non-sexual connection


[Notes]
so to summarize, God didn't intend for people to develop same-sex attraction
same-sex attractions are a brokenness
and connecting romantically or sexuality with people of the same sex are sins
yet same-sex attracted people didn't do anything wrong to bring about their attractions
and God rarely changes peoples' attractions completely when they ask
instead, God asks us to trust Him that He knows what's best for us
and to lean into non-romantic, non-sexual meaningful friendship




broken sexuality: gender incongruence
God intended female-bodied people to feel like girls in their heart & mind (same for boys)
But some girls don’t feel like girls inside (same for boys)
It’s not their fault, God didn’t intend, but it’s another manifestation of brokenness


[Notes]
another kind of sexual brokenness that people don't choose and isn't their fault but makes life more difficult
is gender incongruence
let me explain
in a similar but different way, God intended for male-bodied people to feel like boys in their heart and mind
and for female-bodied people to feel like girls in their heart and mind
but as some people grow up, they realize that they feel something different
some male-bodied kids don't feel like boys on the inside
and some female-bodied kids don't feel like girls on the inside
not because those boys or girls did anything wrong
or because their parents did anything wrong
or because God intended for them to experience this gender incongruence
but because, for whatever reason, the particular way their sexuality was affected by the brokenness of the world was that they feel this incongruence between their biological sex and their sense of being a boy or a girl in their heart and mind




broken sexuality: gender incongruence
We know God meant for them to be girls/boys
God asks them to resist changing their body to match their broken gender
Gender incongruence often resolves by adulthood, but sometimes it doesn’t


[Notes]
in these cases, we know that their biological sex is as God intended,
but there's something broken about their inner sense of being a boy or girl
now some might suggest that people who experience gender incongruence should take hormonal or surgical steps
to make someone's biological sex match their inner sense of being a boy or a girl
but that would mean rejecting God's gift of a person's biological sex
that would mean breaking something that's not broken to match something else that is broken

and again, some might suggest that Christians who experience gender incongruence should ask God to fix this mismatch
and again obviously God has the power to do whatever He wants
and sometimes God does that
and sometimes, over time, these feelings of mismatch between a person's biological sex and inner gender naturally go away
but sometimes they don't
not because Christians who experience persisting gender incongruence have done anything wrong or because God is mad at them
but because God doesn't always answer our prayers the ways we ask Him too




broken sexuality: gender incongruence
Some wonder about gender incongruence but realize they just dislike cultural expectations
God encourages these Christians to seek comfort from other Christians when in pain


[Notes]
ohh, and sometimes, people who wonder if they experience this gender incongruence
realize that they don't actually feel like they're in the wrong body
but instead, they just feel like the cultural expectations for boys or girls (that aren't found anywhere in the Bible)
are too limited, too rigid, and they just want some space from those
but they're grateful for God's gift of making them a boy or a girl

and still, sometimes, gender incongruence persists in distressing ways
and God asks Christians with those enduring gender incongruence to keep moving forward
resisting temptations to ignore God's wisdom and remake themselves with hormones or surgery
and instead asking their brothers and sisters in Christ to comfort them when they're feeling particularly in pain about their mismatch
and to be people who can listen during the difficult days




if you feel gender incongruence
Jesus loves you! He’s not surprised, and it’s not your fault. He still had good plans for you!
You don’t have to make sense of this alone: share with a trusted adult


[Notes]
if any of you experience gender incongruence, I want to know too that Jesus loves you
and that he's not surprised
And this isn’t your fault
God loves you deeply and still has good plans for your life.
also, you don't have to make sense of this alone
whether it's me or your teacher or one of your parents or a different adult,
please tell a trusted adult
and they'll just listen, and give you a hug
they'll reassure you that you didn't do anything wrong
and they can walk alongside you as you ask Jesus about the best ways to make sense of your feelings

And if any of you have friends who gender incongruence, continue being a good friend and treat them like you would anyone else

I've got a close friend like this
his name is Jesse
from a young age he says he felt drawn to girls things more than other guys seemed to
and then when he went through puberty, he was very uncomfortable with his body's changes
he said when he saw the changes happening to his body in the mirror, it made him sick
he hated them
and he tried never to see himself undressed
later he found a name of his experience: gender incongruence
he knows that God intended for him to be a male, to be a man
and yet he feels differently inside sometimes
yet He wants to honor God and God's gift
so Jesse has chosen not to take hormones or have any surgeries
instead, when he feels distress, he reaches out to one of his friends, talks about his pain, and asks for a hug
he's said a big thing he's noticed is that after sharing with more people about this part of his story,
he doesn't feel so alone, and his gender incongruence doesn't feel as painful



what’s
broken

[Notes]
okay, so we've seen with multiple brokennesses so far
that sometimes, on this side of heaven, things won't get fixed
they won't be made right, right?
some form of painful brokenness may continue
and while we can find comfort in Jesus and each other
this world will be broken until Jesus returns
things will continue to be off, to be different than they should be
until Jesus comes back and makes everything right




We have hope because Jesus will return to fix all brokenness
In the meantime, Jesus has asked us to care for each other as brokenness persists
And find meaning/purpose in caring for people in their brokenness


[Notes]
that's why we as Christians have hope
because while others look at the brokenness of the world and the ways that things just seem to get worse
and might be hopeless
Christians know that Jesus will come back and make things right
Jesus will make all sad things untrue
and that in the meantime, Jesus has asked for us to care for each other
to do what we can to make things right in small ways
and to take courage that the most meaningful life, the most love, is found in continuing to follow God's wisdom and care for those who are hurting
that's what makes life in a broken world worth living
have you ever noticed that?



activitywe’re made to help others where we hurt

[Notes]
maybe that doesn’t make sense yet
let me help
get out a piece of paper, and I’m going to lead you through a couple of question
don’t worry, you’re not going to have to share this with anyone

okay, first list three ways that you’ve personally been impacted by the brokenness of the world
divorce
death
depression/anxiety
job loss
made fun of / bullied / left out of group
don’t know how to play a sport or an instrument
made fun of for how you dress or haircut or glasses
cant sing
don’t understand something in school and embarrassed
parent or sibling who is mean to you

then think of a time when one of your friends was struggling with the same thing
and you were able to comfort them
reassure them
give them helpful advice
listen well

how did you feel then?
how did helping someone else, particularly around where you’ve experienced pain, feel
did it feel like it made some good out of your experience, not to cancel out the bad, to some good to sit next to it?
did you feel more alive, more whole, more real, more connected to God, yourself, others?

anyone willing to share?



what’s
broken

[Notes]
and finally, there's some other kinds of broken sexuality that some of you have or will be tempted to engage in
that would bring harm to yourself or others, either in the short term of long term
all of these are about seeking pleasure for ourselves in ways that take from others or ignore God's wisdom




broken sexuality: lust
God made us beautiful and wants us to treat fellow image-bearers with dignity
We are tempted to disobey God + lust over the image of others without their consent
You can resist and choose not to fantasize


[Notes]
one of those is lust
each of us bear God's image
and should be treated like image-bearers, with dignity
it is good that God made us each beautiful in different ways
emotionally, intellectually, and yes, physically

but because our sexualities are broken, we are sometimes tempted to lust after and objectify others
something in our head invites us to think sexually about someone else
to continue looking at parts of their body longingly
because we are enjoying how looking at them and thinking about them makes us feel
and we don't care whether they have given us permission to use their image in this way
or that we are misusing an image of God.
We're enjoying turning them into an object for our consumption
and we sinfully continue to do so

unfortunately, when we do this, we are not only ignoring God's wisdom to refrain from lusting after another
and using them inappropriately for our sexual pleasure
we are also engaging sexually with another person's image without their consent

next time you hear that voice inviting you to continue looking and fantasizing about sometime,
what if instead of giving in, you chose to say "no"
what if you resisted?
what if you pushed back?
we'll talk more about how to resist in a second, but I hope you see that there's another option
you don't have to follow your feelings, your urges
you are not a slave to them




broken sexuality: pornography
Similar to lust, and then more…
Porn actors are often trapped in sex slavery, so viewing keeps people in bondage
Porn is addictive. Some can’t stop when they want to, and it impacts their real lives.
Ask a trusted adult for help


[Notes]
another form of sexual sin is watching pornography
this is a particular form of lust
which harms ourselves and others for the reasons already mentioned

but pornography is extra dangerous
both because many of the actors in pornography are trapped in sex slavery
and each time you click on a video, you are giving that site traffic and the ability to sell ads on their page
and make more money off of that person's sex slavery

and it's dangerous because pornography is particularly addictive
pornography is a $5 billion industry, at least in the US
about 75% of all young adult men and women view pornography at least once a month
and the rates are similar for Christian young adult men and women
too many teenagers and young adults I know are addicted to pornography
they want to stop looking at it, but they can't
they find themselves searching for stranger and stranger content to get the same excitement
it warps the way they think about people in real life, encouraging nonconsensual actions
its been proven to make it more difficult for people to enjoy health sexual intimacy with their spouse in the future
and it numbs our ability to connect with our own feelings or with God or with other people

I've struggled with this at times
when I was in middle school, one of my friends showed me porn for the first time
and every time I was at his house he would bring some up on his computer
I knew it was wrong, but it was also exciting
eventually I started looking up that stuff on my computer
I felt guilt and shame and wanted to stop, but I just couldn’t stop looking at it
eventually, I asked my parents for help
they didn’t scream at me or get mad
they could tell I had gotten mixed up in stuff that was too powerful for me
they helped put software on my devices to block porn
and they reminded me that if I'd already asked Jesus for forgiveness, I was totally and completely forgiven
we'll talk about other ways to resist temptation more generally in a second
but for now, if you're struggling with pornography, please know that you can ask your parents or teacher for help




broken sexuality: masturbation
People have different opinions
Few can masturbate without lusting
We’ll talk generally about how to resist temptation soon


[Notes]
okay, another area of sexual brokenness is masturbation
now, different people have different opinions on whether masturbation is always, sometimes, or never a sin
some say they can masturbate consistently without lusting
(without sinfully objectifying the image of another)
But I don't know anyone like this.

So for most people, practically speaking, the real question is whether it's a sin to lustfully masturbate.
And The answer to that question is clearly, "Yes."
I can already anticipate the loud and swift responses, "But it's biological. It's not healthy to get clogged up..."
My response? "Let's worry about the effects of never masturbating once we get to the point
where we're actually going for long periods of time without masturbating."
Or in other words, progress, not perfection.
Arguing about the practicalities of perfection in our head is a common way the Enemy
tried to get us to give up on resisting temptation.

Ignore that. Just focus on progressively reducing your frequency and depth of lust.
again, we'll talk about how in a second




broken sexuality: sex outside of marriage
God intended for Christians only to have sex within marriage
Some are tempted to have sex outside of marriage, believing “it’s no big deal”
We aren’t made to connect and disconnect in such meaningful ways, it’s painful


[Notes]
sex outside of marriage (and crossing of sexual boundaries outside of marriage) is another kind of sexual sin
God intended for Christians to enjoy sex only within the context of Christian marriage
for the purposes of enjoying connection with each other and with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

unfortunately, some are tempted to have sex outside of marriage
they're tempted to believe that sex is no big deal
that as long as both parties consent, it's not harming anyone

even if you're not a Christian, please believe me when I tell you that I have many Christian
and non-Christian friends who have had sex outside of marriage
and everyone single one of them has shared that they wish they hadn't
every single one of them said that that kind of connection binds two people together in a particular way
in a way that isn't meant to be separated
and when it is separated, it is deeply painful
whether it's a few months later when they break up, or a few hours later when a hookup is over
there's a pain and loss left over

You see, one of the reasons God instituted marriage is because we aren’t meant to connect deeply with people only for that connection to be severed
because it would be bad for men and women to connect sexually and have children and then be torn apart
that’s why He instructs us not to engage in those things outside of Christian marriage
God saw something that would bring great pain to our lives
(to connect deeply only to be torn apart)
He called it a sin, and He asked us to stay away—for our sake.

now some would say they can have sex with people, it's no big deal, and they don't feel these things afterward
but as a licensed professional counselor, let me reassure you that they only feeling "nothing"
because they have connected and torn apart so many times that they have become numb to the pain of disconnection
and the price is that they are no longer capable of connecting with someone in a deeply emotional, vulnerable way




broken sexuality: nonconsent
God intended for romance/sex to be consensual
Some are tempted to take romantic/sexual connection without permission
If you’ve been a victim, it’s not your fault, no matter what


[Notes]
finally, I want to talk about the sexual sin of doing sexual things with someone without their permission
God intended for any romantic or sexual activity to be consensual
but brokenness tempts some people to take romantic and sexual connection from others without their permission

I hope it is obvious how this hurts the other person
and how this angers God for you to mistreat an image of Him in that way
I also want to make something else clear:

if any of you have ever been the victim of some kind of nonconsensual romance or sexual activity,
I want you to hear that it was not your fault
no matter what anyone tells you, no matter what some voices in your head might accuse you of,
it doesn't matter how much you flirted or how cute you dressed or whether you said "yes" to something earlier in the night
no one ever has the right to take from you romantically or sexually without your permission
and please hear me that surviving a nonconsensual experience like that can be a traumatic experience
so if you find yourself haunted by that, please reach out to DECA



what’s
broken

[Notes]
okay, so we've covered multiple ways we can individually commit sexual sin
do you notice any patterns among these?
each of them involved the Enemy offering us false hope
particularly when we're burdened by painful emotions like sadness, fear and anger
or we're lonely or tired
and he lies to us
he reminds us how God's wisdom can be hard work
and he tempts us to ignore God's wisdom
and instead suggests that we take some shortcuts to make ourselves feel better
that there's easier ways to deal with the pain
that we can just fantasize about someone sexually to make us feel better
or look at sexual videos
or cross sexual boundaries with our girlfriend or boyfriend
the Enemy tells us that those things will make us feel better and that they won't hurt anyone, including ourselves
but that's a mirage
instead, we find the opposite is true
we don't experience lasting relief or real connection
instead we experience more pain
more sadness, fear, and anger
more loneliness
more exhaustion
the Enemy's shortcuts don't work in the long-term
and they rarely work in the short-term




temptation is predictable
false hope of easy connection/comfort
particularly when we’re lacking healthy connection with others
and when we’re overwhelmed with sadness, fear, or anger
leading to a habit almost automatic sin


[Notes]
okay, so we've covered multiple ways we can individually commit sexual sin
do you notice any patterns among these?
each of them involved the Enemy offering us false hope
particularly when we're burdened by painful emotions like sadness, fear and anger
or we're lonely or tired
and he lies to us
he reminds us how God's wisdom can be hard work
and he tempts us to ignore God's wisdom
and instead suggests that we take some shortcuts to make ourselves feel better
that there's easier ways to deal with the pain
that we can just fantasize about someone sexually to make us feel better
or look at sexual videos
or cross sexual boundaries with our girlfriend or boyfriend
the Enemy tells us that those things will make us feel better and that they won't hurt anyone, including ourselves
but that's a mirage

instead, we find the opposite is true
we don't experience lasting relief or real connection
instead we experience more pain
more sadness, fear, and anger
more loneliness
more exhaustion
the Enemy's shortcuts don't work in the long-term
and they rarely work in the short-term

but we keep on falling for the same lies
why?
well, one reason is because the Enemy gets us in the habit of going to them, to the point where it feels automatic
it feels like we're not even choosing anymore
He's so persistent to tempt us with the same things over and over again
he trains us, like a pet, to quickly go to the destructive bandaids
to the cheap substitutes
and it becomes automatic

and we keep falling for the same lies because we keep getting caught in a vulnerable position
because we're got sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, and exhaustion that we haven't addressed in health ways
so we're easy targets for the Enemy




activitytime machine

[Notes]
I want to do an activity to make this more clear
get out a piece of paper
think about time you recently felt particularly tempted by one of these
maybe even gave into temptation
from 0 to 10, give the level of that temptation a number
did all of that feel kind of automatic? like you weren’t fully in control? like it was just kind of happening to you?
then think about the hours or day before that
do you remember feeling sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, or exhaustion?
I’ve provided a feelings chart if you’re not sure what you felt
you can just read through those feelings, and use whatever words fit for you

okay, now, imagine going back in time, and a few hours or a day before you were tempted
what if you had reached out to a friend or parent or Jesus and shared about your sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, exhaustion, or whatever you felt?
if you had done that, do you think the temptation would have been as tempting?
or less tempting
let’s give it a number again
from 0 to 10, if early in the day you had shared with someone about your painful feelings, how tempting would the temptation have been?

okay, now, what’s the difference between those two numbers
start with high number and work down to 1

final comments?



broken, but connected

[Notes]
thankfully, there's hope
you see, if you or one of your friends are struggling with one of the kinds of sexual brokenness
the solution isn't to just say "try harder" to resist, grit your teeth more, clench your fists tighter
and then be alone




the solution: ask the Holy Spirit to heal you resist sexual temptation by

connect with friends
feel your feelings
break habits of sin





[Notes]
it's to run to Jesus and to your friends and ask for a hug, a conversation, help
God gave us the Holy Spirit and each other to lean on

You can ask the Holy Spirit to help you resist sexual temptations by connecting with friends, feel your feelings, and breaking habits of sin




#1 connect with friends
when our connection buckets are empty, it’s more difficult to resist temptation


[Notes]
First, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by connecting with friends
Have you noticed that when we aren’t filling out connection needs buckets in healthy ways
That broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts?
When you ignore your need for community and connection and try to go at it alone,
you end up making unwise decisions later.
Lust, masturbation, pornography, and crossing boundaries with your boyfriend or girlfriend all become more difficult to resist.

This has certainly been true in my life. For a long time, I was tired of needing people in my life
I'd been hurt by people who said I was their friend and said I could depend on them
But then they abandoned me or later rejected me
So for a season, I didn't want any close friends. I just wanted to be okay being alone.
But during that time, I found temptations to look at pornography and cross physical intimacy boundaries much more difficult to resist.
It was almost like my loneliness, the emptiness of my connection needs buckets,
was giving those temptations more power. Was fueling them.
It wasn't until I started reaching out to friends again and connecting with them in healthy ways, 
that I found greater strength to resist temptations.




#1 connect with friends
if we’re intentional about connecting in healthy ways, temptations are easier to resist


[Notes]
But if we’re intentional about filling our connection needs buckets in healthy ways with friends, it’s take power away from the Enemy’s temptations and makes them easier to resist.




#1 connect with friends
invest in a few close friends
share about your fears, pains, hopes, dreams
ask them for help when you’re in pain and when you’re glad
connect about Jesus & give each other hugs


[Notes]
Invest in a couple of close friends
I don't think there's anything you really need that you couldn't get reliably from a couple of good friends
let your friends get to know the real you
share with them your fears and pains
and your hopes and dreams
when you're feeling sad or angry or afraid, tell them, and ask them to listen and comfort you
when you're happy about something, tell them so they can celebrate with you!
whatever big ideas you're wrestling with and challenging problems,
share those with your friends and invite them to help you make sense of them
read the Bible and pray and worship Jesus together
give each other hugs, don't be afraid to sit close to each other on the couch, lean your head on their shoulder

I’ve got a good friend who I met for the first time just after her divorce from her husband was finalized
her husband was not a good man and he abandoned her when she was still pregnant
but divorce was still painful
I had just met her, but we both cried over lunch
since then we've become friends
and we serve together, helping parents and pastors better care for LGBT+ people
one moment that particularly shows the depth of this friendship was when I was having doubts
about whether God exists
I got to a point of crisis where I had so much doubt that I didn't know what to do with my life
or how to even spend my day
she didn't scold me or push intellectual arguments on me
she just packed her kids in her car, drove to my house, and told me to get in
then she drove us all to a coffeeshop, got me a pastry and coffee, and then just listen
and gave me hugs
and sat by me when I cried
and sat patiently when I was numb and couldn't say anything but also didn't want to be alone
That’s what friendship can look like



activityI pledge!

[Notes]
I want you to take a couple of minutes to reflect on your own
and don’t worry, you’re not going to have to share this with anyone
when were three times this past week that you wished you had had a friend to connect with
either to do something fun or to share about painful feelings or to get help with a problem or for a hug or encouragement when you weren’t doing well
write down three specific moments from the past week

then, next to each of those, if you could go back in to and you had to reach out to a friend about each of these three, what friend would that be
like, imagine if you had all of the courage in the world
and you weren’t afraid of your friend rejecting you or being embarrassed
if you know 100% they would say yes to helping you out
who would make the most sense to reach out to for each of these
and they may be different people
one friend might be better to share painful feelings with, a different friend is better for a hug, a different friend is better for doing fun stuff
okay, write those down

okay, look at those three moments, and your three friends
what if in the next week, when something similar comes up, you reached out to those friends
instead of trying to get through life along
what do you think?
can I challenge you?
what if we took a pledge together?!

I pledge
that in the next week
if I need to connect with a friend
about fun stuff or painful stuff
I’m going to try
even if it’s scary
I’m going to dig deep
and ask for help from a friend
at least once




#2 feel your feelings
reduce the power of temptation by caring for your painful emotions instead of ignoring them


[Notes]
Second, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by feeling your feelings
it might seem counterintuitive, but the best way to resist sexual temptation
the best defense against sexual sin
is listening to and caring for our emotions

the key emotions are gladness, sadness, fear, and anger
particularly when you feel one of those three painful emotions, could I encourage you to learn from them instead of ignoring them?




#2 feel your feelings
fear needs you to see risk & think wisely
anger needs you to see injustice & seek justice
sadness needs you to see loos & mourn it


[Notes]
when you're scared, your body is trying to tell you that there's actually something that involves risk in your life
that you might get hurt
and your body is trying to make sure that you've thought wisely about that risk and prepared for the future

when you're angry, that's often because there's something unjust, something unfair in the world around you
and your body wants you to seek justice in some way, or at least recognize for yourself that it isn't fair

when you're sad, it's because you've lost something small or big, and your body needs for you to grieve
for you to mourn
for you to spend time giving yourself permission to be sad about the loss




#2 feel your feelings
connecting with feelings is the only way to get beyond them
you don’t have to connect with your feelings alone
ask friends for help & resist temptation easier!


[Notes]
with each of these, the solution is rarely about doing something quickly to make the emotion go away
it's about giving yourself time and space to feel your feelings
connecting with them is the only way for them to get out

but you don't have to do it alone
and sometimes it's too scary to do alone
that's why it's important to lean on friends
to share when them when you're feeling sadness, fear, or anger
to ask them to listen
to ask questions
and to give you a hug

if we do that, we have much less of a need for the destructive shortcuts that the enemy suggests
we've taken care of ourselves in healthy ways, so lust and porn and crossing boundaries are less tempting
its easier to see how those won't actually help us, and then to resist them




#3 break habits of sin
after connecting with others and your emotions, try to interrupt patterns of sin
ask parents to add software/blockers to devices
ask a trusted adult to hold you accountable and check-in often


[Notes]
And third, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by breaking habits of sin

Whether it’s lust, masturbation, porn, or crossing sexual boundaries with someone you’re dating,
Remember how I shared about how my sexual sin felt automatic for a season
Like I wasn’t even choosing it anymore, but it was just happening?
And I couldn’t stop?
Well, after you connect with friends in healthy ways and connect with your feelings
You can focus on breaking what feel like automatic patterns of sexual sin
An easy way to break the habit of porn is to ask your parents to help you put software or some kind of blocks on your devices to keep you from being able to access porn
If you’ve been crossing sexual boundaries with someone you’re dating, maybe you could ask a trusted adult to help you come up with better boundaries, better rules about when and where you’ll hang out one-on-one with the person you’re dating
And a final way you can try to break the habit of any of these sexual sins is by asking someone you trust for help holding you accountable. Someone to check in with you regularly about how you're doing with those. Sometimes just knowing that someone will ask is enough to give you a little more strength to say "no"




#3 break habits of sin
David Saavedra
Tere Toledo
Karen Mosquera
Julie Marcum
Rebecca Estes
Jonathan Minchala
Moni Gamboa
Chris Wimer


[Notes]
You can connect with any teacher at this school
But these teachers have gone through some extra training to make sure they can help you with this stuff
And they are particularly eager to support you
So if you’ve gone back and forth in your head about reaching out to someone,
can I encourage you to choose someone on this list and reach out to them soon?







connection in community



[Notes]
to close, please, trust God that He first made this world perfectly
and while everything has been bent and is broken by the mistakes of humans
He can still see His good design amidst the brokenness
and He notices what will bring us harm as well
He's shared with us what painful things to avoid and what life-giving things to seek in His Scriptures
He's a good Father
trust Him
trust His wisdom
whatever you're burdened with, you don't have to make sense of it alone
you can seek our the Lord in prayer and lean on your brothers and sisters in Christ



questions?



activity anonymous, check all that apply

[Notes]
so there’s an anonymous survey on your desk
don’t put your name on it
and don’t share with anyone else
I just want you to go through this checklist, and put a checkmark next to the stuff that you’ve either personally experienced
or someone close to you has experienced
these are in no particular order

write the number of your grade level at the top

have one of your parents or grandparents died early in life?
have your parents struggled to bear a child when they wanted to?
are your parents divorced?
has someone close to you cheated on their spouse?
do you or someone close to you experience same-sex attraction
do you or someone close to you experience gender incongruence?
have you or someone close to you struggled with masturbating and not being able to stop when you wanted to?
have you or someone close to you struggled with looking at pornography and not being able to stop when you wanted to?
have you or someone close to you struggled with crossing sexual boundaries with a girlfriend or boyfriend?
have you or someone close to you had an abortion?

please answer these honestly
then I’m going to collect them and tally them
to make sure I’m covering the stuff that matters to you
and I’ll share about the result later in the week

ohh, and if you don’t know what something is, just leave it blank



activity

[Notes]
To explore that, I want to do something together
everybody stand up, and line up in the middle of the room
now I'm going to ask some questions
and depending on your answer, you'll either move to this side of the room or that side of the room

Okay, here's your first question
If you had a pet, would you rather have a dog or a cat?
If you were dating someone, would you rather get chocolate or flowers as a gift?
Do you think people need romance to be happy?
Do you think people need to have children to be happy?
Do you think we all need some kind of long-term family in the same house?
Do you think God has advice for the best ways we connect and seek family?
Would you trust God's wisdom, even if it were different than what you wanted to be true?
Do you think there will be romance and marriage in heaven?
If you were married and had a good relationship with Jesus, would you still get lonely sometimes?
Can friendships protect you from loneliness just as well as marriage?
Have you felt burdened by sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, or just being tired sometime in the past month?
Who did you turn to for help? Your friends? Parents? Jesus? Boyfriend/girlfriend? No one?

Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




If you had a pet, would you rather have a dog or a cat?



If you were dating someone, would you rather get chocolate or flowers as a gift?



Do you think people need romance to be happy?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think people need to have children to be happy?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think we all need some kind of long-term family in the same house?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think God has advice for the best ways we connect and seek family?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Would you trust God's wisdom, even if it were different than what you wanted to be true?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Do you think there will be romance and marriage in heaven?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




If you were married and had a good relationship with Jesus, would you still get lonely sometimes?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Can friendships protect you from loneliness just as well as marriage?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Have you felt burdened by sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, or just being tired sometime in the past month?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?




Who did you turn to for help? Your friends? Parents? Jesus? Boyfriend/girlfriend? No one?

[Notes]
Would a couple of people be willing to share more about why you chose to stand where you are?

okay, you can go back to your seats




activityif you had a lifetime of focus&skills, what would you fix?

[Notes]
I’m curious, if you were committed to singleness for Jesus for a lifetime
what could you do with all of that focus and energy and know-how?

I want to do an activity
grab a sheet of paper
and I want you to take a couple of minutes to consider these questions
I want you to dream
if you spent a lifetime committed to singleness for Jesus
and you still had lots of community
and you were rarely lonely
and then you had all of that time and energy
dream about what you could do with that!
when you look at the world around you, what problems most bother you?
what pains people you care about most?
now imagine yourself spending a lifetime helping people like that
and fixing problems like those!
what might be different about the world around you after a lifetime of that?

2 min reflect
3 min pair&share
2 min report out



activitysurvey results!

[Notes]
okay, do you remember those surveys you filled out at the very beginning of our first conversation?
where I asked each of you to privately share how you’ve been directly or indirectly impacted by sexual brokenness
well in between then and now, I tallied up how many of you checked each box
and I just wanted to share with you the results
so you can get a sense of how relevant this conversation is to all of us
and to reassure you that if you checked a lot of those boxes, you aren’t alone

then read them off from a couple of easy ones, the difficult ones, and then the most common ones

I hope you see, these matter to all of us
and none of us are alone!
