


Acklen Avenue Church of Christ
Youth Volunteer Training


talking to teens about sexuality




[Notes]
Equip mission
Vision
My story



Turn & Talk
What have your experiences been doing life with people among your friends, family, and coworkers who experience same-sex attraction?

What fears and hopes do you have about talking with teens about sexuality?






Training Objectives
Sexual Identity Development
Before Coming Out
After Coming Out
Practical Application






Before we start: Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin (Matthew 6:12-13; James 1:14-15; Hebrews 4:15)

Same-sex romantic/sexual activity is a sin (Genesis 19; Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10; 1 Timothy 1:8-10)

God does not promise that a person’s same-sex attraction will change in this lifetime (Philippians 3:12)

[Notes]
These are my personal beliefs and the beliefs of the ministers/elders at Acklen Ave (for the most part)






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond (Hebrews 4:15)

Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all (John 10:28-30; Romans 8:38-39; Ephesians 4:30)

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully (Ezekiel 36:26)
Before we start: Beliefs






God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like (Hebrews 13; Acts 2: 42-47)

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ (1 Corinthians 12:12-31)
Before we start: Beliefs



Before we start: Side A



God makes people gay
God blesses same-sex marriages in the same ways that He blesses opposite-sex marriages
Requires theological maneuvering or a belief that the Bible is not binding/prescriptive for a modern context 

[Notes]
Another way to present these beliefs is to contrast them with a cluster of different beliefs in each direction
Value-neutral language popularized by the Gay Christian Network




Before we start: Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All people are called to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways




Before we start: Side X



Same-sex attracted Christians must reject their attractions and work toward change
Continuing to experience SSA is a sign of willful disobedience
Homosexuality is sinful
God intends for all people to marry someone of the opposite sex



Before we start: Terms
Lots of options and no perfect term

Use whatever vocabulary you are most comfortable with




[Notes]
Read through the list of terms
You don’t have to agree with my definitions




Share



Side A vs. B vs. X—which does Acklen Ave believe and embody? To what extent to these match your personal beliefs?

Which of these terms/definitions are new to you or problematic? What barriers do you feel to term-mirroring?
15

[Notes]
Gay vs. homosexual vs. same-sex attracted vs. queer vs. LGBT+ person
Encourage not to use homosexual
Recognize why SSA can be problematic
Talk about why a Side B Christian with SSA might want to identify as gay



Acklen Avenue Church of Christ
Youth Volunteer Training


talking to teens about sexuality






Training Objectives
Sexual Identity Development
Before Coming Out
After Coming Out
Practical Application






DEVELOPMENT







Adolescence is a time of Physical, Cognitive, and Social Development

Teens are asking questions:
Who am I?
Where do I belong?
Sexual Identity Development

[Notes]
No less true for SSA
Doesn’t have to be more challenging for SSA if we provide understanding + tools to navigate well and we support them well
We will see that we cannot wait until a teen comes out to us to provide this understanding and tools

Info from Mark Yarhouse book



Sexual Identity Development



Recognize they experience same-sex attraction and are different than peers

Same-sex sexual behavior

Label oneself as gay/lesbian/bisexual

Ongoing relationship with the same sex

Disclosure to another person
12 - 14
16 - 17
17 - 18
15 - 18
17 - 18

[Notes]
What do you notice about all of these?
milestones happen in high school
college is too late!
parents dont know what they’re doing!
Disclosure is often the last step or at least after recognizing one’s attractions, experimenting, and having a first same-sex relationship






Because milestones occur before disclosure, parenting cannot be reactive:
Preemptively talk about these questions and provide answers
Build trust and openness with how we talk about this topic
Be patient as teens make sense of these questions when they do share
Impact on parenting?

[Notes]
So how should this information impact parenting/pastoring?






What do SSA teens need to hear before they come out?
God’s narrative of sexual stewardship for all people
How that’s good for LGBT+ students
Answers to the big questions
An invitation to share


Impact on parenting?

[Notes]
what do teens need to hear before they come out?

If all they hear is that God is against homosexuality, we are setting up the children in our church to either embrace homosexuality or to struggle with deep shame, loneliness, depression, and suicidality, OR BOTH
This has been my experience in my own life and the lives of others

We need to offer them something good, something better, something compelling, something they can say “yes” to

They need to hear how God has called us to steward our sexualities
They need to hear what that means for people who experience same-sex attraction, how that is good for them, and how they still fit in God’s family
They need to hear the answers to the big questions: how same-sex attraction develops, what part God played and why, how one should identify, how to have healthy relationships, etc.
In doing all of this, you need to demonstrate that you are someone they can trust, and you need to specifically and repeatedly invite them to share with you and/or their parents if same-sex attraction is a part of their story



Share



What are the benefits of sharing these with teens before they are 12? Barriers?
God’s narrative of sexual stewardship for all people
How that’s good for SSA students
Answers to the big questions
An invitation to share

	How can we invite teens to share?
26



Training Objectives
Sexual Identity Development
Before Coming Out
After Coming Out
Practical Application






BEFORE


[Notes]
What to teach parents and teens before someone comes out
what we believe, why, and how it is good for LGBT+ people
encourage deep friendships and relationship with God (created for relationship with God and others)



WHY + HOW


[Notes]
Why do the elders/ministers at Acklen Ave believe what they do? And how is that good for LGBT+ people?



Why?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

Marriage defined between man and women (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:4-5) 

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage (Genesis 19:1-9) 

Written for a people in a time and place



The Big Question



We should NOT be asking, “What is permissible?”

We should be asking, “What is most good and will bring the most blessing in my life?”

We have to offer one narrative for God-honoring sexual stewardship that sufficiently speaks everyone’s story, including those who experience same-sex attraction.

[Notes]
Many push back against those 5 verses, saying that they don’t condemn same-sex, loving, monogamous marriages with certainty
really, that’s a person who wants something to be true and unless there’s an undeniable argument against it
We shouldn’t be asking “is this permissible?”

We should be asking what is most good?
What will bring the most blessing to my life?
And then don’t settle for anything less
sin = settling for less than thriving?

So we can’t just argue against a sinful behavior
We have to offer the most good things
We have to cast a vision for sexual stewardship that sufficiently speaks to the stories of LGBT+ people and the challenges they face

To do so, we have to look more broadly at how God created us for relationship and what contexts He has given us to best enjoy relationship



Created for Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19:3-12, Mark 10:2-12, Gen 1:26-27)
Intimate (1 John 4:19)
Procreative (Gen 1:28)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
To do that, we need to first look at who God is
God is a person in community, in family in the trinity
And 6 elements consistently describe the love found in God’s family



Created for Family



We are created in God’s image for that kind of love with God and each other

Sexuality – our need for relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive that kind of love

[Notes]
Because we are created in God’s image, we are made for that kind of love with God and each other
we are all made for diverse, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment and sacrifice
our sexuality is our need for those things
our need to be in relationship
to know and be known
to give and receive love
and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on cognitive, physical, and spiritual levels



Created for Family



We are all created for family in the Body of Christ (Genesis 2, Leviticus 26:12) 

Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

Neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs

[Notes]
we are all created to enjoy this within the context of family in the Body of Christ, but where and how we find that may look different depending on whether we are called to celibacy or marriage

What do I mean when I use the word family? Well, how Jesus used it...
the family = a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meeting our intimacy needs



Created for Family



None of us can meet our intimacy needs fully or finally in this lifetime (Isaiah 59:2)

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, our flesh will reach out for destructive and unsatisfying alternatives (1 Corinthians 7:1-40)

[Notes]
But sins separate us from God and man and none of us can meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime (Isaiah 59:2)
In addition, if we do not meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, our flesh will reach out for destructive and unsatisfying alternatives (1 Corinthians 7:1-40).



Called to Marriage



Lifetime vocation between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy, raise children for the Body of Christ, and embody the gospel for each other and the world

[Notes]
How does marriage reflect/embody the love of God in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church?

Christian marriage (a marriage blessed and sustained by God) is a lifetime commitment between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy with each other and raise children
to embody the gospel for each other and the world
to reflect the Trinity and God relationship with the Church



Called to Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually

[Notes]
How does Christian marriage specifically embody the gospel and reflect the Trinity and God’s relationship with the Church?

complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically
intimate - sexually, emotionally, and spiritually



Called to Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences
Hospitable – opening one’s home up to those outside of the nuclear family

[Notes]
procreative - raise children (note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)
faithful - lifetime
sacrificial - in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer
hospitable - invite others into home

those called to marriage will thrive when they seek to fulfill these purposes
For those who are called to marriage, they should recognize that marriage will be one of the most difficult things they do
Churches must teach accurately about what marriage is and support families to keep their vows and raise children



Share



The idea that Christian marriage must embody the procreative and complementary natures of God’s love has been contentious. How essential are these? What are the consequences of dismissing these as essential?
41

[Notes]
SL



Called to Celibacy



Matthew 19:8-12
He told a crowd Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate to consider celibacy.



[Notes]
Before we talk specifically about celibacy, I want to review a couple of passages of Scripture and remind us of the beautiful theology of celibacy in the Bible

First, Matthew 19:8-12
Jesus calls married people to a deeper level of commitment to each other.
He says that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce because their hearts were hard
But except for porneia, which has historically been unclear and likely means marrying under false pretense or committing adultery after getting married but before consummating the marriage
Except for in those cases, there is no grounds for divorce
That’s a high standard
In response, the disciples jokingly suggest that it would be better not to marry

Why is this a joke? Let me give you some context
The Jewish people were commanded to marriage and procreate
Because the multiplication of God’s people was the primary way through which God fulfilled his covenants to his people
Celibacy was not good or normal for the average Jew
So to suggest it would be good or normal for a Jew not to marry was laughable

Notice what Jesus says in response?
“Not everyone can accept this word, but only to those whom it has been given.”
Jesus says, yeah, actually, for some of you whom have been called to celibacy, that would be good
This is radical
He told a crowd Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate to consider celibacy
This is a big deal






Called to Celibacy



Hebrews 8
Christ’s death establishes a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises because we join God’s family by Christ’s work on the cross, not birth into a Jewish family.


[Notes]
Not only does Christ life as a celibate man and words about celibacy lift up the vocation of celibacy, but his death and resurrection gave celibacy special theological meaning
As described in Hebrews 8, Christ’s death establishes a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises because we join God’s family by Christ’s work on the cross, not birth into a Jewish family
This is meaningful because marriage and procreation are no longer a commandment for all








Called to Celibacy



Matthew 22:30
Christ’s resurrection started the work of bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth where we will all be celibate.

[Notes]
And Christ’s resurrection started the work of bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth where we will all be celibate, as Matthew 22:30 makes clear
This is meaningful because it makes clear our eternal destiny is the life of the celibate and celibacy in the body of Christ points us to the New Heaven and New Earth







Called to Celibacy



These passages and historical context make clear that the teachings and life of Jesus lifted up celibacy from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian.

[Notes]
These passages and historical context make clear that the teachings and life of Jesus lifted up celibacy from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian







Called to Celibacy



Matthew 19:8-12
Jesus recognizes that the vocation of celibacy is permanent.
We are called to a vocation of celibacy or marriage by God (it is given), sometimes against our preference.


[Notes]
But it doesn’t stop there
Back to Matthew 19 for two important teachings about celibacy
He goes further by comparing those called to celibacy to eunuch
This is important for two reasons: first, he recognizes that the vocation of celibacy is permanent
Being a eunuch is permanent. You can’t undo genital mutilation.
And second, he recognizes that we are called to a vocation of celibacy, sometimes against our preference
He compares the celibate to eunuchs by birth, by others, and by choice
Not everyone settles on a vocation of celibacy because it is their first preference








Called to Celibacy



1 Corinthians 1:7-35
Paul confirms the teachings of Christ.
He communicates a preference for celibacy, but recognizes that some are called to celibacy and others are called to marriage.
Paul recognizes the celibate’s freedom from raising children results in a greater availability to lead and serve the Church.


[Notes]
In 1 Corinthians 1: 7 and 8, 
Paul confirms the teachings of Christ
Paul recommends that Christians refrain from sex and not marry. 
He communicates a preference for celibacy and a desire that all would be celibate, but he recognizes that all are not called to celibacy. 
Paul recognizes that for those who are called to marriage, that will be a gift as well. 
Continuing in verses 32 through 35, he advocates for celibacy because the concern of the celibate is not divided between God and one’s spouse and children.




Called to Celibacy



Celibacy is NOT a call to loneliness for the sake of the gospel

Celibacy IS a call to diverse, intimate, and spiritually procreative relationships that are maintained by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality

[Notes]
Now that we’ve looked at relevant passage of Scripture, what is celibacy?

celibacy is NOT a call to loneliness for the sake of the Gospel
celibacy is still a call to diverse, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality, just like marriage



Called to Celibacy



Unique benefits:
Deeper friendship
Greater possibility for spiritual parenthood, church leadership, and healing of broken families
Can take greater risks for the gospel

[Notes]
celibacy offers some unique benefits:
deeper friendship
greater possibility for spiritual parenthood, leadership in the church, and the healing of broken families
able to take greater risks for the sake of the Kingdom (missionaries in dangerous places or experiments in community living)




Called to Celibacy



Providing spaces for celibates to thrive is part of the Church’s DNA
Honor and support celibacy in practical and structural ways
Embrace and thrive in the calling
Celibacy and marriage are equal with different advantages and challenges

[Notes]
doing celibacy well was easy in a time and place where everyone lived in multi-family, multi-generational homes
but the wealth of our society has made that uncommon, if not weird
so how do we do this in a modern context?
we need a new narrative for this, a modern narrative for a modern problem
yet we aren’t without examples—creating space for celibate people dates back to the early church
the gospel called people to have one wife, which led to many widows
in Acts 6, the church accepted the responsibility to create space for those widows and provide for them
that is in the DNA of the Church

For those called to celibacy, the Church must honor and support that calling in practical and structural ways so that they can meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways.
After a period of discernment, if a person finds that they are likely called to celibacy, even if it is not their preference, they would do well to embrace and thrive in that calling

We must recognize and teach that celibacy and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges.
Each of us innately have the same capacity to do either marriage or celibacy
Then once we respond to God’s calling, He will continue to give us the grace to thrive in our relational vocation



Share



Celibacy is a permanent vocation given by God for the purpose of doing kingdom work less possible while raising children. Every Christian should be open to it and has the capacity to do it well. And celibacy is still a call to deep relationship and family.

How is this different than how you were taught to think about lifetime singleness? How is this good?
57

[Notes]





Why does it matter?



Both are about embodying the gospel:
Diverse, intimate, and procreative relationships maintained by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality point to the Trinity and Christ + the Church
Celibacy reflects Christ’s life and future patters in the New Heaven and New Earth

[Notes]
So that’s how the Church has taught that God has invited us to steward our sexualities
Why it is so important that we get that right? 
they are both ultimately about embodying the gospel and that makes it a gospel issue
all: we are all made for diverse, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality that ultimately point to God’s love in the Trinity and for His people
celibate: reflects christ’s life and our future patterns in the NHNE



How is that good?



If the Church did this well, it would be a place where those who experience SSA could thrive in celibacy or a mixed orientation marriage (MOM)

Their callings would be just as beautiful and the challenges would be no greater

[Notes]
what does that mean for those who experience SSA?
and why does God’s narrative for sexual stewardship matter to us?

if the Church did this well
It would be a place where those who experience SSA could thrive in celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex (just like straight people!)
calling just a beautiful and challenges no greater

Again, our argument is that asking whether something is permissible is the wrong question
We should be asking what is most good?
And God’s narrative says that for every person, the most good will be found in a period of abstinent singleness, celibacy, or marriage with someone of the opposite sex done correctly

church where celibacy taught and valued and just as good
other straight people celibate and thriving
church that recognizes brokenness and talks about brokenness of sexuality
also recognizes what marriage really is
so can thrive in MOM

everyone enjoys meaningful community in the Body of Christ



Share
What about this narrative is challenging? How does it contrast with the narrative of sexual fulfillment offered by culture and many churches?

How is this narrative good and beautiful and compelling for LGBT+ people?



66



INTIMACY


[Notes]
I want to reiterate that we are all created for deep relationship with God and each other
We need to encourage parents and teens to seek this
That regardless of your sexual orientation, this is for you





Training Objectives
Sexual Identity Development
Before Coming Out
After Coming Out
Practical Application






AFTER


[Notes]
How do we support teens and parents after they come out?
what is our/parents posture?
preparing for the questions they are likely to ask



POSTURE


[Notes]
I assume that you have basic pastoral care skills
This training is meant to supplement that with SSA-specific ideas and skills
We don’t expect every pastor, lay leader, and parent in your church to be able to effectively minister
Different people will have different depth of expertise





Choose to be sensitive to the stories and experiences of LGBT+ people
Don’t tokenize
Appreciate their unique experiences
Practice term mirroring

Posture




Demonstrate safety and empathy
Invite to share, and listen
Trust the Holy Spirit


Posture




Avoid forced-choice moments
Invite to submit to traditional sexual ethic
Patiently explore God’s call to sexual stewardship

Posture

[Notes]
Right now, our churches aren’t offering something better, so if you push them into a corner and make them choose, they will not choose Jesus
This has been difficult with my own side A gay Christians friends—their depression and suicidality
That patience is key—it may take decades or longer of walking through these ideas for the Holy Spirit to move the person where he/she needs to be




Share
Many find it difficult to maintain an environment of sensitivity, safety, empathy, and patience because of messages like, “If I do not condemn, I am condoning.”
Where does that come from?
Are you comfortable resisting condemnation and trusting the Holy Spirit?



1:15

[Notes]
Threatened by and angry about changes in society (despite Facebook wall, your nephew is not the gay agenda)
	Defense against insecurity in own beliefs
	Jesus ate with tax collectors and sinners




MINISTER


[Notes]
7 questions
creating space for questions, helping think well, and listening well 
don’t expect you to answer questions for them



Ministering: Core Q’s



How does same-sex attraction develop?
None of us are how God made us to be
Neither born gay nor chose to be gay

[Notes]
When someone asks this question, they are often asking whether people are born gay or choose to be gay
So let me address both of those
So first, are we born gay?
Well none of us are how God made us to be
corrupted at genetic level and raised in broken world
So even if born gay, doesn’t mean God intended us to be gay
Twins and hormone studies inconclusive, suggestion predisposition
So Not genetically determined
But also Not chosen
Neither born gay nor choose to be gay



Ministering: Core Q’s



How does same-sex attraction develop?
Understanding developmental factors may help an individual gain acceptance but should not be addressed with the goal of “fixing” the individual



Ministering: Core Q’s



Will my same-sex attraction change?
There is no promise of change in attractions
Some will experience change and some will not, but not as a reflection of how hard we want it or work at it

[Notes]
Thorn in Paul’s side



Ministering: Core Q’s



What part did God play and why?
Did not intend for anyone to be gay or make anyone gay (James 1:13) 
We are all corrupted at a genetic level and grow up in a broken world (Psalms 51:5) 
God allowed it to happen        (Romans 5:12)

[Notes]
Does God make people gay?
Give people over to “a depraved mind”?
Allow people to develop same-sex attraction?
Play no part?

If God protected us from the consequences of our actions and the actions of others, would we really have choice?
God seeks to redeem all brokenness for our good and His glory (Romans 8:28) 

Question of Evil
No good answer





Ministering: Core Q’s



Who am I in light of what I am feeling?
Name and affirm experience while encouraging delayed identification
Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior
Radical acceptance: acknowledge and commit to work through

[Notes]
I am a child of God, first and foremost
And I accept that same-sex attraction is a part of my story
And it has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world
What do I do with that? How do I label that?

For me, it has been helpful to identify as a gay Christian
Shared heritage
Similar life experiences
Unique perspective in the Body of Christ
Still secondary and operated by my identity in Christ






What do I do with all of this shame?
Satan’s primary weapon
Our response:
Identify, Reject, & Replace
Share
Ministering: Core Q’s

[Notes]
When we tell people to hide their attractions
Not to talk about them
Don’t allow them to identify around them in any way
When we blame people for reaching out for forbidden things from their loneliness
We heap on the shame







 How do I meet my intimacy needs?
What are my needs?
Normalize
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Stewardship of meeting in healthy ways

Ministering: Core Q’s






 How do I meet my intimacy needs?
Same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
Seek healthy relationships with safe friends

Ministering: Core Q’s






 What does the future look like?
A lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship
Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world
Obedience to God’s teachings and surrendering our brokenness to God will bring goodness (Jeremiah 7:23)
Ministering: Core Q’s






 What does the future look like?
God invites everyone to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Both are equally good and available to those who experience same-sex attraction
Ministering: Core Q’s



Share
Which of these questions would you feel most comfortable helping someone think through? Least comfortable?
How could you preemptively address these questions among your children?
How could you use discussion around these questions to disciple a gay teen?



1:35



Supporting Teens



Ask to submit decisions to traditional sexual ethic (for now)

Patiently walk with teens as the Holy Spirit reveals why that ethic is good, beautiful, and true






Identify spaces to process and mourn away from teens

External Resources:
Nashville Parents Group
Guiding Families (Lead Them Home)
PeacePrints Retreat (CenterPeace)
Supporting Parents



Training Objectives
Sexual Identity Development
Before Coming Out
After Coming Out
Practical Application






APPLICATION




What NOT to Say 
Limit conversation about sexuality to demonizing gay sex and people
Ignore opportunities for conversation because you feel uncomfortable or ill-equipped
Neglect from educating yourself about the topic
Let your children see your negative reactions
Entirely pass the responsibility of ministry off to someone else






[Notes]
all I heard from family and church was God is against homosexuality
when gay people came on TV, my parents said very derogatory things
had no reason to believe either would respond well
never talked about being Christian and having SSA
thought it was my fault and I wasn’t praying hard enough
when caught me watching gay porn, didn’t talk to me about it being gay because didn’t want to believe I was gay
when an incident came up with another guy, blamed in on the other guy being gay and still didnt want to believe I was gay
ignored the conversation and waited for me to bring it up
didn’t seek out resources for themselves
showed me their mourning and confusion
shipped me off to a therapist
talked about fighting it and becoming straight and wanting grandkids

instead
talk about it before you have any reason to believe they might be gay
normalize same-sex attractions and celibacy
clarify important theological ideas (cause, choice, chance, brokenness, future possibilities, shame)
recognize that there are faithful Christians who continue to experience SSA
don’t run away from the conversation and initiate
grieve, process, and learn on your own—seek out counseling without son
give time to make sense of this for themselves—call them to certain standard and share hope they land there on their own and help them get there




Sharing with Teens
Today we had a conversation about sexuality and how we as Christians can steward our sexualities in God-honoring ways. In particular, we talked about same-sex attraction: when a boy likes another boy or a girl likes another girl. I want you to know that we are all broken—none of us are how God intended us to be. If one day you realize that you are attracted to other boys/girls like you, I want you to know…
You don’t choose who you are attracted to
You’re not alone and you don’t have to make sense of this alone
You don’t need to feel ashamed—it’s not your fault
God doesn’t love you any less and He has great plans for you
I’m not going to try to make you straight
Please let me in and let me walk through that with you.






Scenario 1
A set of parents contact you about their child. He is 10 and shared that he is attracted to other guys and has been struggling with pornography. They are terrified and eager to “fix” the situation. They ask you what they did wrong and what counselor they should send their child to to help him become straight. In conversation they use the terms “homosexual” and “gay lifestyle”. They admit that when their son first shared, their reaction was a combination of sadness, shock, and anger. They are confident their son can “choose to be straight”. In part, they blame his pornography habit for his growing “homosexual desires” and have warned him that God “does not let homosexuals into the kingdom of Heaven.”






Scenario 2
A 15-year-old student frantically texts you for help navigating his fears about his parents finding out that he is gay and has a boyfriend. He doesn’t think there is anything wrong with being gay. His parents recently came close to finding out he was gay. He doesn’t know whether he should tell his parents because “they are Trump supporters, so, you know…” They’ve asked you to promise not to tell anyone else.






Scenario 3
Two parents send you the following email: “Our 12-year-old daughter shared with us last night that she is bisexual. We were so thankful that she shared and reiterated what we have said before: God loves her and would be delighted if she joined a man or a woman in Christian marriage. We are reaching out because we are a bit concerned about how our church teaches about sexuality. We heard that you hold a traditional sexual ethic. We understand that different people believe different things, but we strongly prefer that you not indoctrinate our daughter with that theology. We believe God made her bisexual and will bless whatever marriage she finds herself in. And we believe that hearing anything to the contrary would be unhealthy for her spiritually and psychologically.”






Scenario 4
A 14-year-old student reaches out to you that she has a secret. After some back and forth, she shares that she is attracted to other girls. She’s convinced that wasn’t God’s first intention and that God does not bless same-sex marriages. Beyond that, she has no idea what to do with her attractions. She says she feels alone and ashamed every day. She doesn’t know who to trust. She’s afraid she will always be gay and that life will continue to be lonely. She is worried about how God sees her, and that has kept her from praying or worshipping like she used to.






Scenario 5
Another set of parents reaches out for help processing and finding resources for their family. Their 12-year-old son recently shared they he was gay. They made clear to him that he didn’t choose who he was attracted to, he has nothing to be ashamed of, and that God loves him just as much as if he were straight. They’ve invited him to share honestly about his thoughts and feelings regarding his sexuality, and they have asked him to steward his sexuality according to the beliefs of their family and of the church while they process this as a family. The parents admit that they feel overwhelmed. They wonder what resources there are for them as parents and for their son.






QUESTIONS?

