Are Biblical Sexual Ethics Good?
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (lifetime opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

So yes, I’m convinced that’s God’s best for me
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity
I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.
I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.
These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started EQUIP in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family

and through all of this, God has been so good
He didn't intend for me to have to deal with this brokenness, this burden in my life
but He's been faithfully working through other circumstances in my life to reveal his wisdom to me
to encourage me to come out of the closet and share my story
to find what I needed to keep going a month at a time
and ultimately God has been faithful to redeem this enduring brokenness in my life for His glory and my good
He gave me a vision for Equip and for the Nashville Family of Brothers
and through these projects, God is making meaning out of my suffering
He's offering hope to LGBT+ people and their loved ones across the globe
and He's offering hope to vocational singles looking for lifelong, lived-in family to fuel their kingdom work
I'm spoiled that I get to be a part of all of this
I'm so deeply blessed
Are Biblical Sexual Ethics Good?

[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today:
Some Christians are theologically convinced that gay romance/sex are sins,
but deep down they still feel like people need romance to be happy.
Deep down, it doesn't feel fair that celibacy often seems like the only option God offers to gay people.
Some earnestly wonder whether God is asking gay people to sacrifice more than other Christians and wonder whether that's good.

So, are biblical sexual ethics good? for gay people? for straight people? for anyone?
Key Questions

Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?

[Notes]
in short, yes, it’s good for everyone, including gay people!
but to fully answer that, we’ll explore the following questions
Do any of us need romance or sex? Did God promise any of us romance or marriage or sex?
Is God’s wisdom for gay people arbitrary? Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is still offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what can the Church do about it?


[Notes]
but before we jump into those question
I want to call to your mind Genesis 22
where God tests Abraham by commanding Abraham, in verse 2,

“Take your son, your only son, whom you love—Isaac—and go to the region of Moriah.
Sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on a mountain I will show you.”

Abraham gathers the supplies and journeys with an unsuspecting Isaac to the place where Isaac would be sacrificed

picking up in verse 9
“When they reached the place God had told him about, Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it.
He bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar, on top of the wood.
Then he reached out his hand and took the knife to slay his son.
But the angel of the Lord called out to him from heaven, “Abraham! Abraham!”

“Here I am,” he replied.

“Do not lay a hand on the boy,” he said. “Do not do anything to him.
Now I know that you fear God, because you have not withheld from me your son, your only son.”

Abraham looked up and there in a thicket he saw a ram caught by its horns.
He went over and took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering instead of his son.

So Abraham called that place The Lord Will Provide. And to this day it is said, “On the mountain of the Lord it will be provided.”

a standard rabbinical teaching of this passage encourages the reader to consider this episode in its context
throughout the book of Genesis, one of the big things God is doing is showing His people how He’s different than the other gods they would have been familiar with

He’s the real God
and He’s a good God

in that context, most of the gods of the ancient near east asked for child sacrifice
so Yahweh asking Abraham to sacrifice his son would have seemed like a typical god request to Abraham
still painful
but not surprising

yet Yahweh ultimately shows that He’s different
instead of asking humans to sacrifice others to stay in good relationship with the God
Yahweh provides the sacrifice
He’s different
He’s good

with that in mind, and thinking about our conversation today about sacrifice
and what’s good for us
what’s truly good
I want to highlight that our God is a God who asks,

“Do you trust me?
I’m not like other gods.
I won’t ask you to arbitrarily suffer.
I won’t ask you to give us something that’s actually good for you.

But I will ask you to give up lesser loves.
I will ask you to give up things that the world says are the best things.
That the world says will satisfy you.

And at times, it’s gonna seem like I’m asking you to sacrifice everything.
Will you trust me?


What is “sacrifice”?

sac·​ri·​fice verb (used with object)
to surrender or give up, or permit injury or disadvantage to, for the sake of something else.

[Notes]
which begs the question: what does it mean to sacrifice?
if we’re, at times, asking whether giving up gay romance is not good, if it’s a cruel and unnecessary sacrifice to ask of gay people
then what does it mean to sacrifice?

according to dictionary.com, sacrifice as a verb often means
“to surrender or give up, or permit injury or disadvantage to, for the sake of something else.”

so, Is giving up gay romance a sacrifice?

if that means doing something that's good for me but involves strain
like lifting weights or going on a run
then i guess the quick answer is yes
webinar over
sexual stewardship, all Christian stewardship, practicing any kind of self-control is taxing
so in that sense, when anyone is following God's wisdom for their sexuality, it's a sacrifice

but when most pose this question
what they're asking is whether God is asking me to do without something good? Something I need?

The short answer is, no.

he's not asking us to give up spiritual friendship.
or the need for connection in community.
he's only asking us to give up lesser love.
and to say "yes" to whichever pathway to fullness if life and love God wants to invite us


Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?
Key Questions

[Notes]
so first, Do any of us need romance or sex? Did God promise any of us romance or marriage or sex?
do any of us need romance or sex?

[Notes]
no

Jesus didn’t have sex. 
Paul was committed to celibacy (+many Christian leaders in the past 2000 years)
Matthew 22:30 says there won’t be marriage/sex in heaven.
The Bible doesn’t teach that we need marriage/sex or promise them


[Notes]
None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
God has never promised us romance or sex or said that either are necessary to meet our intimacy needs.
the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or romance to be whole people.
Quite the opposite.
Jesus didn’t have sex.
Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the mothers and fathers of the Church have been celibate.
And Jesus says that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex.

In Matthew 22:30, He says this: “At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.”
because the non-romantic, non-sexual ways we'll connect with God and each other will be 1000 times better than any romance or sex in this life
It doesn’t make too much sense that the example of our faith was celibate or that we will all be celibate in Heaven if marriage and sex are necessary to be fully human.
Do we need romance/sex?
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.
Do we need romance/sex?

[Notes]
Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.
Do we need romance/sex?

[Notes]
And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Why? The Idol of Romance promises love, belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness, but it leads to casual connection, thoughtless contraception, abortion, codependency, adultery, divorce, and loneliness.
Yet we *feel* we need romance…

[Notes]
yet we feel it in our bones that we need romance and sex to be happy, whole people, right?
why?
the idol of romance

The idol of romance is not our friend. It's deceitful, and it seeks to destroy our relationships.
In Disney movies and Taylor Swift songs we hear and see a beautiful depiction of connection that will fulfill and satisfy us more than anything else can.
Why?
Because it's exclusive, it's special. But not just with anyone.
The idol of romance promises us we’ll be united with the person meant specifically for each of us, who matches each of us perfectly.
We’re promised it'll be easy, effortless, and self-sustaining, because it's the love we were destined for.
That's the magical lie of romance idolatry.
And that false hope destroys every relationship we step into, dooming every connection to fall short of the effortless, deeply-satisfying, Disney romance we've been promised.

Ultimately the Idol of Romance promises us love, belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness,
but in reality, it leads to casual connection, thoughtless contraception, abortion, codependency, adultery, divorce, and loneliness.

You might notice I’ve been intentional to focus on romance idolatry, not marriage idolatry.
Why?
Because healthy theology and practice of Christian marriage are not the problem.
And romance idolatry takes root long before marriage.
Disney movies and Taylor Swift songs teach our children that magically coupled love is the best thing the world has to offer.
Christians idolize romance, too
"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue… A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself…every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil…to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.”

[Notes]
Unfortunately, Christians offer the same idolatry, but with a facade of spirituality.

Do you recognize this quote from a top-selling book about Christian masculinity?

"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue…
A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself…
every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil…to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.”

Do you notice the idol of romance?
From an early age, parents and pastors highlight Bible stories and holidays centering romance and marriage.
When parents comment, “When you get married…” or ask, “Are you dating anyone?” they leave no room for stories or celebrations of singleness for the sake of Christ’s kingdom.
Christian teens assume they are free to indulge in romance as much as they want, as long as they don’t cross certain lines.
72% of pastors surveyed by Equip believe “If a person desires to marry and have kids, then God wants them to marry.” 
Mistaken Christian beliefs…
God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is about companionship and mutual fulfillment.
I only have to have kids if and when I want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

[Notes]
Many western Christians mistakenly believe the following five statements about sexual stewardship:

God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is about companionship and mutual fulfillment.
I only have to have kids if and when I want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

Now, I know we come from a variety of convictions about sexual ethics,
so we may disagree on the wisdom/foolishness of some of these,
but regardless, the topline belief is that we need romance/sex to be whole/happy people and we're promised it by God if we're good Christians.

This leads to painful results.
Half of Christian marriages end in divorce,
and a 2017 Barna Study found that singles struggle more with depression, anxiety, doubt in God’s existence, and rebounding from doubt.

Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?
Key Questions

[Notes]
Okay, but it still feels unfair to gay people, right?
And what’s so wrong with gay romance, anyway?
asked to give up good things?

[Notes]
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things? Is God’s wisdom for gay people arbitrary?
Asked to give up what’s good?
God’s wisdom isn’t arbitrary.

God has lovingly revealed to us what will bring us goodness and what will bring us pain because He’s a good Father.

[Notes]
i think it's helpful to start by clarifying that God's wisdom in the scriptures isn't arbitrary
God's wisdom in Scripture for what will bring goodness vs. pain in my life isn't arbitrary.
God didn't intend for me to be gay, notice that I'd want gay sex, and then draw a boundary around gay sex to test me.

I believe God made the world perfectly, He gave us choice, and then humans chose to disobey Him. 
Our sin bent everything about the world, yet God looked back at the world, He noticed what would bring us harm,
but he also noticed the ways His best still shined through.

So He revealed to us in His Scripture what would bring us harm and what His best still is for us,
and He gave us the Church to read and interpret the Scriptures with

Whenever a Christian asks a question about morality, the right question to ask isn’t, “What can I get away with?”
Instead, it’s “What is God’s best for me?”
And we answer that question by studying His Scriptures
and discovering whether there’s a historic Christian consensus or a contemporary global Christian consensus on the question 
The whole of Scripture reveals God’s best for everyone’s sexuality: vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

We just need to read the words of Jesus.
Asked to give up what’s good?

[Notes]
But when we ask, “What’s God’s best for gay people?”,
we don’t even need to look at the verses that many believe call same-sex sexuality activity a sin.
They are meaningful evidence, but I don’t think they’re necessary to know God’s wisdom for my sexuality.

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not those few passages, but the whole of Scripture.
Consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives,
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness.
When it comes to what to do with our capacities for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear.
There are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

To arrive at that, we just need to read the words of Jesus…
In Matthew 19, Jesus defines marriage as a lifetime commitment between one woman and one man to serve God.

Then Jesus offers the alternative of lifetime abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.
Asked to give up what’s good?

[Notes]
In twelve verses in Matthew 19, Jesus tells us everything we need to know

Jesus calls His people back to God’s original intentions for marriage
A lifelong marriage between one woman and one man to serve God, not themselves

And then Jesus introduces an alternative
Permanently giving up romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention

Those are God’s best for us
Christian marriage or vocational singleness
Regardless of sexual orientation

That’s what a vast majority of Christians have believe over the past 2,000 years
And that’s what the majority of global Christians believe today
Love = Willing the good of the other
Love = Empathy + Wisdom
Empathy – Wisdom ≠ Love
Wisdom – Empathy ≠ Love
Asked to give up what’s good?

[Notes]
Now some would respond, “But a loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage”

The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,”
that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that.

It’s saying that God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest.
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is.

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer.
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers.
How do we know what God wants to offer us? By reading the Scriptures with the historic Church!

But it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things.
We have to help people take hold of them.
We have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive.

So love = empathy + wisdom
empathy without wisdom isn’t love
wisdom without empathy isn’t love

If we want to imitate God and love people,
we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to His wisdom and help them do so
Sin has led to pain…
Why did God order the world such that gay romance/sex isn't His best for me? I don't know.

But I know that ignoring God's wisdom re: gay romance/sex has led to pain in my life and the lives of people I’ve loved.

[Notes]
Why did God order the world in a way that gay sex/romance isn't His best for me?
I don't know.

But I do know that ignoring God's wisdom when it comes to gay romance and gay sex
has been destructive for myself and for people I love

At a 30,000 foot level, the average adult same-sex partnership lasts much shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
And the rates of adultery and infidelity are much higher in same-sex marriages
Now we can argue whether this is the result of societal oppression, the natural consequences of ignoring God’s wisdom, or some of both

what’s much more compelling for me is that, unfortunately, most of my gay Christian friends
who have abandoned historic sexual ethics for an ethic that condoned gay sex eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them have followed a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

because God loves us, He has shown us what is inherently good for us and will inherently bring us pain.
He urges us to pursue what is good. He cautions us against what is broken.
So complying with God's wisdom by giving up gay sex/romance isn't a sacrifice.
It's a blessing.

Leaning into God's design for us and our needs for relationship is what will bring us the greatest meaning and truest joy.
God guides us toward those best things.

but what are those “best things”?

Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?
Key Questions

[Notes]
if God isn’t asking gay people to give up those things that are truly good
if God still wants to offer those best things to gay people
then what are those best things?!
what’s God offering to gay people?

[Notes]
if we don't need romance/sex, then what do we need? what are we promised? what will satisfy? what are we made for?

What did God make us for?

We want genuine connection, lasting community, to know and be known.

God wants the same for us! He made each of us for connection in the context of community.

[Notes]
God made us for 
genuine connection
community
love that lasts
rich, meaningful, steady relationship

to feel safe
to trust that the people who love us love us well and keep doing so until we die

to go on this life journey with people who truly know us
and therefore know how to accompany us well on that journey

to offer the same to others
and enjoy the delight that can only be achieved after decades of that knownness

God made us for those things
our capacity for connection and need for community isn't a test
it's a gift
he made us in his image to enjoy intimacy with Him and each other
and he wants us to enjoy that to the fullest
Made for connection in the context of community

Two best paths: vocational singleness and Christian marriage

Brokenness tempts us to settle for less. But thankfully, God has offered us warning and wisdom.

[Notes]
And He gave us two best ways, two different but equally good paths for enjoying connection:
vocational singleness and Christian marriage.

While the world is broken
God knows we will be tempted to settle for less than the fullest life
so He shared with us in the teachings of Jesus and others
warnings about what will cause us harm and to avoid those
plus wisdom about the best ways we can still enjoy connection in community
He gave us direction for how to enjoy our sexuality to the fullest
What is sexual stewardship?

God has given each of us the task of managing our need for community and our capacity for connection.

But our sexualities are just one of many opportunities for stewardship!

[Notes]
Or to put it another way, God has invited us to steward our sexualities

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul admonishes Corinthian Christians for their sexual immorality and calls them to sexual stewardship:

“Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God?
You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies.” —vv. 19–20

Our bodies were made by and given to us by God.
All have sold their bodies to the slavery of sin with our disobedience.
Yet Christ in his mercy paid the price for that sin, bought us back and chose to dwell in us.
Our bodies are not our own.
They are dwelling places for the Holy Spirit that we’ve been given to steward on this side of heaven
until we receive our perfected resurrected bodies for the New Jerusalem.

So sexual stewardship refers to our God-given task of managing our capacity for friendship, family, romance, and sex and our need for healthy intimacy.
As believers, we all called to steward, to carefully and faithfully manage, multiple aspects of our lives in ways that honor God:
finances, the environment, eating and exercise, sleep, mental health, meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways,
character development, and how we leverage our 9-to-5 jobs for the sake of the kingdom.
Faithfully stewarding each of our sexualities is just one of those tasks, but an important one!

Framing conversation around sexual stewardship is helpful because it zooms out from focusing only on sex and marriage
Too often, a simple “save sex for marriage” mantra suggests that marriage and sex are something that we are owed and can take.
That we have a right to seek our pleasure, as long as we follow the rules.
Instead, a focus on sexual stewardship more broadly includes vocational singleness and suggests that marriage and sex aren’t forgone conclusions.
The phrase “sexual stewardship” properly identifies our sexualities as a gift from God
that we are meant to fearfully and faithfully steward before God based on his wisdom, not based on our pleasure.

How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.
Made for connection in the context of community

[Notes]
So let's start with the basics:
God created you for connection in the context of community

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.

God is a being in community.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a community called the Trinity.
Then when Jesus died on the cross for our sins and resurrected, He made a way for all of us to join the Trinity in God’s family.
You see, God enjoys perfect connection in the Trinity, and while Christians don’t always love God perfectly, He loves us perfectly in the big family of God.
Because we’re made in God’s image, designed to imitate God, we’re also made for connection in communities.




sexuality =

our need to be in community

+ our capacity to connect with other humans
Connection in Community

[Notes]
We call our need to be in community, our capacity to connect with other humans, “sexuality.”




Our need to know others and be known, to give and receive love
We don't need romance/sex to meet our needs for connection
We have physical bodies + intellectual minds + emotional/spiritual soul, so we need connection on each of those levels
Our sexuality is…


[Notes]
So how can we think more broadly about sexuality and our created need and capacity for connection in the context of community?

More generally, our sexuality is our need to know others and be known by others.
to give and receive love
But I'm not just talking about romantic love.
This also includes brotherly and sisterly love. Friend love.

That’s key to understand: we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection.

Yet, because we each have a physical body and an intellectual mind and an emotional and spiritual soul,
God designed us to need and have connection on a physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual level.





[Notes]
Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.”
God provides a good chunk of our spiritual connection.
Those who are married will partially fill each of those buckets with the connection they experience in their marriage.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t fill your connection buckets.
You will still need emotional connection, intellectual connection, physical connection, and spiritual connection from friendship.


God invites all of us to cultivate deep, committed spiritual friendships where we can find lifelong companionship. 
Intimate friendship for all

[Notes]
There’s actually a rich tradition of intimate friendship throughout the history of the Church and in the Scriptures
If we look at the friendships of David and Jonathan, Ruth and Naomi, Jesus and John, and Paul and Timothy
we find these deeply connected, non-sexual, non-romantic committed friendships

many call them spiritual friendships
they were family in the truest ways for each other
and often offered just as much companionship as a marriage
in a way that neither competed with marriage nor took away from it

Here's how Ruth speaks about her friendship with Naomi in Ruth 1:16-18
But Ruth replied, “Don’t urge me to leave you or to turn back from you.
Where you go I will go, and where you stay I will stay.
Your people will be my people and your God my God. Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried.
May the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if even death separates you and me.”
When Naomi realized that Ruth was determined to go with her, she stopped urging her.

Here's how Jonathan felt about his friendship with David in 1 Samuel 18:1-4
After David had finished talking with Saul, Jonathan became one in spirit with David, and he loved him as himself.
From that day Saul kept David with him and did not let him return home to his family.
And Jonathan made a covenant with David because he loved him as himself.
Jonathan took off the robe he was wearing and gave it to David, along with his tunic, and even his sword, his bow and his belt.

This kind of spiritual kinship, chosen family, spiritual friendship between people of the same sex
has been common through most of recorded history

These spiritual friendships let each other need each other and give each other permission to ask of each others' time/energy/etc.
They expect to get hurt and commit to forgive
These friendships were enough to sustain those who were single, and a hearty supplement for those who were married


God designed two best ways/vocations for Christians to enjoy connection in the context of community:
Vocational Singleness
Christian marriage
*How* can we connect in community?

[Notes]
okay, so we’ve described what God made us for as sexual beings
next, let’s explore the best paths God has given us to enjoy our sexualities to the fullest!

God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?

In short, God has designed two paths for Christians to do that,
two vocations
and He wants to give some of us the gift to walk down one of those paths and others the gift to walk down the other path:
Vocational singleness and Christian marriage

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

both of these are particular ways adult Christians can enjoy connection in the context of community

This is *THE* key lever of God-honoring and life-giving sexual stewardship
If you want the most satisfying connection in community for a lifetime
Then accept the gift that God wants to give you
And live fully into God’s design for the vocation He gave you

The key to sexual stewardship isn’t focusing on what we’re supposed to say “no” to
More often than not, when I meet lonely, disconnected, relationally wounded people
It’s because there are ways they could more fully say “yes” to God’s calling for their lives
And His design for that vocation

for more information on what vocational singleness and Christian marriage are, how to thrive in those vocations,
how to discern which to step into, and how our churches can foster that discernment and thriving,
check out the recording of a past webinar on sexual stewardship for all people, in Equip’s Digital Leaders Course

What’s important for us to see and remember, is that
God is offering all of us spiritual friendship
God is offering all of us connection in the context of community
God is offering each of us lifelong, lived-in human family
He’s not asking gay people to give up any of those
he's only asking us to give up lesser love.
and to say "yes" to whichever pathway to fullness if life and love God wants to invite us


What about gay relationships?
God isn’t asking gay people to give up friendship with those we love. 

He’s inviting us to leave behind romantic/sexual aspects getting in the way of spiritual friendship fully flourishing.

[Notes]
Plus, this appreciation for God’s wisdom
and the intimate, committed, non-romantic friendship He invites all of us to cultivate
can actually help us make sense of the fact that
when a lot of us look at the same-sex romantic relationships around us, there’s seems to be some good there,
right?

Of course there is!
Just like any romantic and/or sexual relationship, most of the day-to-day of the relationship is just committed friendship
So the moments and parts of the relationship that are friendship are good
And God isn’t asking those gay people to give that up
Or flee from that
Or mortify that

He’s inviting us to leave behind the romantic and sexual parts that actually get in the way
of allowing that potential for life-giving spiritual friendship to fully flourish

this has been huge in my life
and my journey of accepting God’s wisdom for my life
in college, this looked like responded to my sexual brokenness by actually investing MORE in meaningful friendship with other men
instead of living in fear of them

then years later, God pushed me further
through pastors in my life and the Scriptures, God made clear to me that I don’t have to give up the desire for lifelong, lived-in family with men I love
instead, God pointed out that I could do that without romance or sex with those men
and actually enjoy more of what I truly desire
which is community
and companionship

God actually reassured me that I need committed community in order to be faithful to my celibacy and the kingdom work it empowers
and He urged me to find what I needed

After college, I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
Unfortunately, each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.

Then in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie (my former Anglican priest)
to share that I felt called to vocational singleness but didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
I asked, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building lifelong family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus six of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.

I’ve actually made lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to this family,
and I know who some of the guys are who will see my ugliest parts but won’t run away,
who I’ll grow old with,
and who will hold my hand when the people we love pass.

and if i'm gonna be honest, when i look around at most of my gay friends from college
who have been hoping to find same-sex romantic love
they're just keep rotating through boyfriends
it seems like following God's wisdom is actually paying off
that it actually does lead to more stable love and family

so yeah, 
God isn't asking me to give up anything that is truly good for me.
He beckons me to enter into intimate, lifelong friendships with men and women, without the need for romance or sex.
Ultimately, I'm grateful for God's warnings of painful paths,
and I joyfully follow God's invitation to truly life-giving relationships.

Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?
Key Questions

[Notes]
So if God wants to offer gay people the best things
Why does gay celibate still seem more difficult?
why’s gay celibacy so difficult?

[Notes]
because it feels harder for gay celibate Christians than for straight Christians refraining from sex outside of marriage in their teens and 20s, right?
it feels like we're being asked to strain more, right?
Why’s gay celibacy so difficult?
It’s not because God is depriving me of something that I need, something that’s good. It’s not because vocational singleness is inherently more difficult. Or that mixed-orientation marriages must be more difficult.

[Notes]
I want to be clear: being a gay Christian committed to a traditional sexual ethic is painful & difficult for (+most faithful gay Christians).

BUT that's not because God is depriving me of something I need, something good (He isn't).

It's not because vocational singleness is inherently more difficult than faithful Christian marriage (it isn't).

It's not because vocational singleness or MOMs for gay Christians *have* to be more difficult than faithful sexual stewardship for straight people (they don't).
Why’s gay celibacy so difficult?
Parents+pastors don't know how to minister to us
Churches enable a double standard of sexual stewardship
Parents wait to talk about sexuality and unwittingly empower the closet
Churches speak poorly about God's wisdom for gay people (or are silent, at best)
Vocational singleness and mixed-orientation marriage are inviable in most churches

[Notes]
Our callings are difficult because of how poorly the Church has embodied a historic sexual ethic:

1. Parents+pastors don't know how to minister to us
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

2. Churches fail to invite everyone to God-honoring sexual stewardship
too often, communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support for either
They enable straight Christians to ignore God’s wisdom to their own detriment
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

3. Parents wait to talk about sexuality and unwittingly empower the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers, and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic, haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late.

4. Churches speak poorly about God's wisdom for gay people (or are silent, at best)
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

5. Vocational singleness and mixed-orientation marriage are inviable in most churches
Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics, but the pathways they offer for sexual stewardship aren’t viable.
Those churches are places where few gay people are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many Christians misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has now swung the opposite direction, and many churches teach that lifetime singleness is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about vocational singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well, and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
Vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out—they’re starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?
Communities of thriving!
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexual stewardship
Christians talk publicly about the challenges gay people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to gay people
Gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
But, your community can become a place where gay Christians thrive according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And in the process bless every Christian in your community

How?
I can share an article with Chris to pass on to you that casts a vision in-depth
But in a few words…

First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
We need to teach about temporary singleness, discernment, vocational singleness, and Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy
So everyone in your church can know how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
And gay people in a church who are not out yet can know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
by equipping parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
So that kids share with parents early and never go into the closet

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to gay people

And last but not least, churches must become places where gay Christians people can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into such a marriage recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and even providing financial support in the early years.

Are Biblical SexualEthics Good?

Do any of us need romance or sex?
Is God asking gay people to give up truly good things?
If not, what are the best things that God is offering to gay people?
Why does gay celibacy still seem more difficult? And what’s to be done?
QUESTIONS?
If you’re a gay & celibate…
Don’t wait for your churches to make your celibacy good & beautiful.

Do what it takes to make your celibacy work for you by owning your celibacy.

Checkout From Involuntary Singleness to Thriving at pieterLvalk.com

[Notes]
and if you’re a gay celibate Christian
well, you know this just as well as I do
our churches probably aren’t going to become places of thriving anytime soon
so what do we do?

it’s gonna be difficult
but I want to encourage you to own your celibacy
and do what it takes to make it beautiful for yourself

I know that’s unfair
but it’s even worse for us it we wait around for others to do what they should
but may never

I really encourage you to checkout an article at pieterLvalkDOTcom
called “From Involuntary Singleness to Thriving”

in it, I explore how I experience more thriving and stability once I actually discerned between vocational singleness and a MOM
settled down into one or the other
and moved out of involuntary singleness

every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between
vocational singleness and Christian marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
including LGBT+ Christians

this doesn’t mean that I think every gay Christian has to date someone of the opposite sex
but at means at least being emotionally and theologically open to the possibility
and genuinely discerning both

If we’re going to ask straight Christians to discern both, we’ve got to ask gay Christians to discern both

why might it help to own our celibacy and step fully into it?.
well, defaulting to long-term singleness often feels forced or involuntary to many

and this involuntary celibacy leads to self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing that Satan uses to tempt us to self-destruction

instead, we’ve got to own our celibacy because there are significant advantages to being all-in. 
And discernment can help us own our celibacy.
You see, discernment is about much more than just identifying the most likely path forward.
It's also about accepting, embracing, choosing, taking a leap of faith, seeking confirmation, and stepping forward.
Discernment can help us move from seeing our celibacy as involuntary to seeing our celibacy as chosen.

I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.

but it’s been particularly through embracing my celibacy and owning it
that the best things in my life have come about.
that’s led to the greatest sources of purpose and belonging in my life.

it opened the door for me to discover the kingdom work God calling me to do with my availability in vocational singleness
that led to me getting to start Equip 10 years ago.
Since then we've trained over 30,000 Christian leaders to protect the next generation of kids from those painful wounds of the closet
and build a Church where they can actually thrive according to historic sexual ethics.

And it opened the door to me getting to start an ecumenically Christian monastery back in 2018
for men in Nashville called to vocational singleness and looking for lifelong, lived-in family to empower their faithfulness and kingdom work.
where I find family today

checkout that article
lean into owning your celibacy and making is beautiful
and please don’t hesitate to reach out to me if you find yourself getting stuck
it’s not an easy road
and we’re not meant to do it alone
Communities of thriving!
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexual stewardship
Christians talk publicly about the challenges gay people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to gay people
Gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
But, your community can become a place where gay Christians thrive according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And in the process bless every Christian in your community

How?

First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
Your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out the one God calls them to
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
you’ve got to equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If kids hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some of them realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting the adults in their lives to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to gay people
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where gay Christians people can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into such a marriage recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and even providing financial support in the early years.

now, if you’re a pastor or Christian leader, you might be tempted to resist that responsibility
to cultivate intentional Christian community for celibate people
but that’s in the DNA of the church, from the very beginning
In Acts 6, we see that the first administrative act of the Church was to provide a home and family for celibate women

Acts 6 verses 1-7 describes a scene where immigrant widows were being accidentally neglected.
The love of Jesus was drawing unmarried people to the church—thank the Lord!
But the need had become too great to be met organically and too great for those called to primarily preach/teach to also take care of these celibate women.
Yet they recognized that it was the responsibility of the Church,
so they empowered other leaders to take care of these practical responsibilities and they resourced that work.

Then fast forward to 1 Timothy 5, Paul is talking about the proper care of widows.
And what do we see?
A house of widows, the beginnings of one of these city celibate homes, a place where celibate women are finding family!

While Paul is holding some of those women accountable for unfaithfulness and offering some lesser-of-two-evils-accommodations,
topline he’s still affirming that it would be best if they kept their commitments to permanent celibacy and family together in the house of widows.

Clearly the Church had by 1 Timothy 5 made good on its commitment in Acts 6 to provide for widows, for celibate women, not only to have food, but to have a home and a family.
That was the first administrative act of the Church.
It’s what leads to establishing the first generation of church leaders after the apostles.
Providing for celibate people is what the Church was created to do.
So get busy!

honor the broken reality and unmet need
accept responsibility
gather singles
inspire intentional Christian community
help them take early steps
support logistically and emotionally

in conclusion
If you're a straight Christian:
don't judge gay people for hesitating to give up gay romance and sex
until your church has taken these 5 steps
if you’re not offering a community where they could actually thrive according to God’s wisdom with reasonable effort,
then you have no credibility to call them to something more difficult than you’re calling other Christians

