Arguments Aren’t Enough:

Pastoral Response
to Side A Theology
Pieter Valk, LPC of

[Notes]
Tyler, thanks for the introduction
So grateful to have this opportunity to share with you today
This work and this topic matters a lot to me
Because I’m gay, I’m a Christian, and I’m convinced that God’s best for all Christians is either a lifetime calling to vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom or opposite-sex Christian marriage

Also, I want to make a quick note about terminology.
What do I mean when I say “gay” and “gay Christian?” I’m going to be using the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex, whether they be gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
I don’t mean to communicate anything about their theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out by using that word.
It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”.

And I’ll use the phrase “gay Christian” to refer to people who are Christians and experience same-sex attraction.
I use that phrase to describe myself because that’s the term that I’m most comfortable with.
But not everyone uses that phrase, and Christians I respect prefer to use different language.
There is healthy discussion Christians can have about that disagreement.
For now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.
Arguments Aren’t Enough:

Pastoral Response
to Side A Theology

[Notes]
Arguments Aren’t Enough:
Pastoral Response to Side A Theology
you, as pastors, need to be able to make a winsome, positive case for a traditional sexual ethic
You’ve heard some of that already, and you’re certain to hear more as the conference continues
but sometimes, as pastors and leaders, you get an email or someone knocks on your door, and the conversation goes something like…
”Yeah, I understand your arguments for a traditional sexual ethic, but what about…” and they go on to list one of the convincing arguments for a progressive sexual ethic
For side a
for many gay people and straight allies, the arguments for side b are irrelevant
they’re convinced by the argument for side a
And you need to be prepared to respond well
To offer better arguments

So today I want to explore how you can respond to the 9 most convincing arguments for a progressive sexual ethic
but as you’ll see, better arguments alone wont be enough
Many of you have probably already experience this
So we’ll conclude with some suggestions for what churches need to do in addition to making better arguments

But first, I want to recognize the stakes of these conversations
These conversations
are high stakes

[Notes]
I want to recognize the stakes of Responding to side a arguments
Because even if we succeed in making more logical arguments
Even if we rationally defeat the arguments for side a
We can still lose the debate, by being mean, by being ugly
If we fail to be winsome, and instead we are combative and venomous and seem too eager to destroy arguments disagree with,
it won’t matter what we say
Because those we hope to convince will stop listening
It wont matter how logical we are
Because those we hope to convince will reject our reasoning because of our pathos

I’ll admit, I have been afraid to cover this topic
I am worried that I wont be winsome enough
I am worried that I will step on a landmine or two
I am worried that my tone or style will undo any progress made by my arguments

And that’s my first encouragement when it comes to responding to side a theology
If you aren’t afraid to step on landmines, that’s a problem
Because you should be
Sometimes, we are too eager to step into this conversation
Its too easy to talk about these in a way that perpetuates a culture war
So if the opportunity arises to respond to arguments for a progressive sexual ethic, first pause, and remind yourself it not enough to just be right
#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
It’s true,
Jesus never talked about gay sex
The “clobber passages” are unclear

But,
The “clobber passages” aren’t necessary 
Jesus had a lot to say about sexual stewardship for all

[Notes]
jesus never said anything about gay sex or gay marriage
The verses that do talk about it are all within context of incest, rape, sex outside of marriage, adultery
the Bible isn’t clear on this so should leave this to people and their God

We can admit that Jesus never spoke directly about gay sex or gay marriage
And we can recognize that the verses that seem to address gay sex, the verses many call the clobber passages, can be unclear
But as I’ll explain, they also aren’t necessary to know what God’s wisdom is for gay people, because Jesus did actually have a lot to say about our sexual stewardship

To be honest, I’d rather just skip the clobber passages altogether,
but you’ll be called on to respond to common arguments discrediting the clobber passages,
so we’ll cover them briefly, addressing arguments against them and recognizing the lack of clarity




#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
The “clobber” passages - Genesis 19

Side A: primarily condemning gang rape or lack of hospitality

Response: gay sex wasn’t the only reason, but it was a prominent feature

Still… 

[Notes]
Some argue that Gen 19 is really about condemning gang rape or the lack of hospitality

And, while it’s true that anyone claiming that gay sex was the sole reason for Sodom’s destruction is wrong,
same-sex sexual activity was a prominent feature of the story told, and its reasonable to conclude that it was one of the reasons Sodom was punished for

Still, this passage, in particular, has been used to justify horrific hate crimes against gay people, and referencing it is likely to unconvincing



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
The “clobber” passages – Lev 18 & 22

Side A: about maintaining ritual purity or condemning gay cult prostitution + author unaware of committed gay relationships

Response: can’t dismiss plain reading, God not limited by author, about ritual and moral purity

[Notes]
Some argue that Lev 18:22 and 20:13 are about maintaining ritual purity or condemning gay cult prostitution
And they argue that these passages couldn’t possibly be condemning committed, same-sex relationships because those were nonexistent in the Ancient Near East

It’s true, gay cult prostitution was probably the most common form of same-sex sexual relations in the Ancient Near East,

But we can’t dismiss a plain reading of the text consistent with centuries of Church teaching
Plus, as we’ll address later, God is not limited by the understanding of the author, even if the author was not aware of committed, same-sex relationships

Ohh, and when it comes to the argument that these passages are just about maintaining ritual purity, not moral purity, if that were the case, we’d expect New Testament authors to be silent about gay sex or even declaring Christian freedom from ritual law to engage in gay sex
But instead we see the opposite in Romans and 1 Cor and 1 Tim, leading us to believe that these prohibitions were about both ritual purity and moral purity



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
The “clobber” passages – Romans 1

Side A: condemning same-sex           idol worship or sexual excess               or breaking gender norms

Response: prohibits female           same-sex sexual activity, so not     about idol worship or gender         norms

[Notes]
Some argue that Rom 1: 18-32 is condemning straight people participating in same-sex rites in honor of idols or sexual excess
Or, because of their views about gender, some argue Rom 1 is prohibiting men from bringing shame upon themselves by playing the receiving role in sex
And perhaps Paul is luring his audience to judge others, only to turn on them and point out that they are no better themselves, as some suggest

But that doesn’t cancel out the fact that Romans 1 goes further than passages we’ve covered so far
Previous passages only referred to male same-sex sexual activity.
Without this passage, one could argue that the Bible merely forbids the sexual practices of some men
But the reference in this passage to female same-sex sexual activity broadens the reference beyond just cult prostitution or pederasty, as those weren’t commonly practiced between two women.

And we can dismiss the argument that the Bible is just prohibiting men from playing the receiving role in sex, because that consideration is irrelevant for female same-sex sexual activity that is still prohibited here



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
The “clobber” passages – 1 Cor 6, 1 Tim 1

Side A: condemning breaking gender norms or pederasty + author unaware of committed gay relationships

Response: prohibits penetrating and receiving roles in gay sex + Paul aware of committed gay relationships

[Notes]
Some people argue that 1 Cor 6:9-10 and 1 Tim 1:8-10 prohibit men playing the receiving role in sex or pederasty, a romantic relationship between an older male mentor and a teenage male mentee
And again, some will argue that committed, same-sex relationships were nonexistent, so Paul couldn’t possible have intended these prohibitions to be against committed same-sex relationships

yes, it’s true, malakoi​ could refer to pederasty or playing the receiving role in gay sex, and arsenokoitai​ seems to be a new word Paul has coined and there isn’t unanimous agreement about the best translation

But the strong consensus of scholars is that the most reasonable translation for arsenokoitai​ is “men who have sex with men”, or more narrowly men playing the penetrative role in same-sex sexual activity
So Paul goes out of his way by using the word ​malakoi​ and ​arsenokoitai​ in 1 Corinthians 6 and 1 Timothy 1 to condemn both the penetrative and receiving partner in gay sex.

Plus, multiple scholars have demonstrated that while less common, committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world. (Greek Homosexuality by K. J. Dover + Roman Homosexuality by Craig A. Williams)
Paul was familiar with contemporaries who wrote about such relationships.
So the claim that the authors of Scripture had no awareness of something akin to modern gay relationships is false.


#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
The “clobber” passages are meaningful but unclear

And Jesus didn’t speak directly about gay sex

But…



[Notes]
So you see, all together, these six passages do 4 different things
condemn playing the passive role in male gay sex,
condemn playing the active role in male gay sex, 
condemn female gay sex, and 
identify same-sex sexual desires as broken.
The verses seem to address every possible iteration of same-sex sexual activity and beyond to ensure that the reader is not mistaken.

But its still true that none of these passages refer specifically to a committed same-sex couple
And Jesus doesn’t say anything directly about gay sex or gay marriage
It’d be a lot simpler if in one of the Gospels, Jesus walked up to two faithful Jews of the same-sex who had somehow gotten married, had been faithful to each other for decades, were raising children together in the faith and could clarify whether that was God’s best for those two believers or not

But we don’t need the clobber passages to know God’s wisdom for gay people
And we don’t need to hear Jesus address gay sex directly to know how Jesus thinks Christians should steward their sexualities

#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
Jesus in Matthew 19

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman

Vocational singleness is the only alternative to Christian marriage




[Notes]
in a single set of thirteen verses at the beginning of Matthew 19, Jesus lays out the two best paths for Christians, speaks to the sexual difference in Christian marriage, and highlights the importance of vocational singleness as the alternative to Christian marriage.

Jesus defines Christian marriage as being a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman,
and he urges everyone to consider vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom,
recognizing that for some it would be voluntary but for others it would be involuntary.

Furthermore, Paul goes on to confirm these teachings in Ephesians 5 and 1 Corinthians 7



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…
Jesus was clear about God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people

[Notes]
God has made clear to us through the Bible what Christian marriage is and that vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom is the best alternative
These are God’s best for His people

So no, Jesus didn’t technically condemn homosexuality
But Jesus and the Bible are clear about God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people
And both gay sex and gay marriage are incompatible with that best



#2 The Bible doesn’t talk about gay people/marriage as we know it…
It’s true – gay people as a cultural group is man-made 

But 	– there have always been gay people
	– committed gay relationships existed
	– Bible addresses activity, not identity
	– God is not limited by the author
	


[Notes]
homosexual orientation/identity didn't exist in Bible times, therefore the Bible wasn’t talked about gay people or same-sex marriage as we think of it today, therefore any prohibitions are irrelevant

Yes, the idea that “gay” people are a distinct cultural group or a distinct sexuality is something created by man—just like race—to oppress people.
That idea is a recent development. 

But there have always been people who experienced same-sex attraction
There have always been people who exclusively preferred sexual relations with people of the same sex
Any claims that this kind of people didn’t exist in the Ancient Near East are unfounded.

Plus, as we’ve already mentioned, while less common, committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world.

Regardless, each of the verses we referenced earlier focus on same-sex sexual activity, regardless of the cultural identity of the individual
God is clear through Scripture that same-sex sexual activity is a sin
No one is claiming that the Bible is addressing gay people as a cultural group
The Bible is addressing same-sex sexual activity, regardless of whether the people engaging are gay, straight, bisexual, pansexual, etc.

And even if the authors of Scripture weren’t aware of sexual orientation or sexual identity, that does not limit God’s inspiration of Scripture.
Some argue that Scripture can only mean what it reasonably meant to the author when he wrote it.
But the Church has consistently taught that God is not limited by the understanding of the author.
God can and has inspired authors to write texts beyond the author’s understanding.
Indeed, multiple times in the Old and New Testaments, authors spoke to ideas that would not be fully understood until centuries later.

So in summary, while its true that sexual orientation and identity didn’t exist, as we know it, in the minds of the authors of Scripture,
there have always been gay people,
committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world,
and God is not limited by the authors of scripture
Plus, we can’t dismiss the prohibitions in Scripture because they address sexual activity, not orientation or identity


#3 The Bible/Christians were
wrong about slavery and women…
It’s true – Christians have used the Bible to justify slavery and oppress women

But 	– God sometimes calls his people to something proximate, not ultimate
	– Trajectory in Scripture toward modern views on slavery and women
	– No trajectory in Scripture about gay sex
Slaves, Women & Homosexuals by William Webb

[Notes]
Many argue that the Bible and Christians were wrong about slavery and gender equality, and in the same way the Bible and Christians are wrong about gay marriage

It’s true, Christians have used the Bible to justify slavery and oppress women
These past couple months white Christians have taken a more honest look at the white church’s complicity in American slavery and racism than ever before, and the legacy of the church is shameful

I’m not going to try to defend Christians or appeal to the credibility of Christians at large as evidence for who is right about gay marriage

But I do think it matters what the Bible says and doesn’t say
And when we take a closer look at how the Bible talks about slavery, gender, and sexuality across the Biblical narrative, we see that these are treated differently

In William Webb’s book “Slaves, Women & Homosexuals” he explains that
The people and place and time that the authors of the Bible spoke into could not have accepted modern ways Christians think about slavery and gender equality
But God is an accommodating God—instead of calling people to perfection he sometimes calls them to something more good that is in reach or within the bounds of their understanding
We do see the way God talks about these things in the Bible change over time—they suggest a trajectory toward the ultimate good

The Old Testament seems to allow, if not encourage, the people of Israel to practice slavery, as long as they aren’t enslaving Israelites
In contrast, Jesus heals slaves and Paul goes as far as to urge Philemon to see his slave as a beloved brother in Christ, not as a slave
The Old Testament seems to treat women as a kind of property,
where as in the New Testament, many women among the followers of Jesus and in positions of leadership in the early church
Ultimately, the Bible points toward what we believe about slavery and gender equality today

However, that same trajectory is not found in how the Bible talks about same-sex sexual activity
It consistently condemns it
God doesn’t seem to be accommodating here, there isn’t a trajectory toward a different, better good
It is a flat line pointing toward the same conclusion throughout time for all people

So in summary, yes, Christians were wrong about slavery and gender equality
And Christians have done a poor job of loving gay people
And perhaps there’s even a shift across the Biblical narrative in what authors call us to
But the Bible does not treat gay sex the same ways as slavery and gender. It does not accommodate across the Biblical narrative. It does not soften or moderate. It is consistent.

#4 People don’t choose to be gay, therefore God makes people gay…
It’s true – People don’t choose to be gay

But 	– Science can’t tell us God’s intentions
	– None of us are how God made us to be
	– Romans 1 clarifies that same-sex attractions are broken, not intended

[Notes]
we now know that same-sex attraction isn’t a choice
Therefore, God must have made people gay and God must bless monogamous relationships with people God made a person to desire

the consensus among scientists is that both genetic factors and environmental factors contribute to the development of SSA
people neither choose to be gay nor are they born determined to be gay

So it’s true, people don’t choose to be gay

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined—if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research—even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.
God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be—we are all corrupted at a genetic level before birth, formed brokenly in the womb, and quickly injured by the broken world we are born into.
None of us are how God made us to be.

So, how do we answer that theological question on which science cannot comment?
Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are unnatural, they are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God doesn’t not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships
But we also do not choose who we are attracted to

So in summary, the problem with this Side A argument is the assumption if people don’t choose to be gay, that must mean God makes people gay
Instead we’ve demonstrated here that none of us are how God made us to be, so how we are today doesn’t tell us anything about God’s intentions
And as we investigate Scripture further, we realize same-sex attractions are broken and God didn’t not intend that for any of us

#5 Sexual orientation doesn’t change, so God must bless gay marriage…
It’s true – There’s no formula for changing sexual orientation

But 	– God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay
	– God has warned us from engaging in same-sex sexual activity

[Notes]
reparative therapy doesn’t work and people’s sexual orientation doesn’t change
So God must be okay with gay marriage
Because if sexual orientation can’t change but God still doesn’t bless gay marriage, that’s just not fair

Well first, we’ve got to answer whether sexual orientation changes

Scripture does not promise permanent relief from any temptation in this lifetime
Limited high-quality research demonstrates that only 3-4% of people who participated in sexual orientation change efforts experienced any change in their same-sex attractions, and even these results were from self-reports that cannot be verified.
No proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change

Do miracles happen? Yes.
But praying for change expecting God to make you straight can be dangerous

The likelihood of your attractions changing even a little are the same as you getting into Harvard, becoming a millionaire, or playing high school baseball and eventually going pro. Would it be wise to pray for those things expectantly?

What happens when your faith in God, your belief that God is good, or your belief that God loves you hinges on whether you get into Harvard, become a millionaire, or your same-sex attractions change?

So those advocating for a progressive sexual are right
sexual orientation is unlikely to change
And praying for change with expectation can be harmful

Still, God did not intend for us to be gay and God has warned us from engaging in same-sex sexual activity

Why won’t God change my sexual orientation if it is broken? You know, I don’t know
But I do know that gay people are not alone in this experience
There are a lot of people in this world asking why God won’t answer their prayers for healing
Asking why a good God let’s bad things happen to innocent people
I’m not going to be able to provide a satisfying answer to that

But I am comforted that God has promised to redeem the brokenness in my life for my good and His glory
And I’ve seen that to be true
My journey of making sense of my sexuality and serving God with my life has brought more meaning and purpose than I ever expected
But that’s because I’ve been lucky enough to find Christian community to support me on my journey

Unfortunately, many don’t find that
And without the support of the Church, many gay Christians stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic find that loneliness unbearable
That’s why better arguments aren’t enough
Because when you push back on this argument for a progressive sexual ethic, you reveal that God is calling gay Christians to steward their brokenness in difficult ways that require the support of other Christians

So let’s talk specifically about the challenges gay celibate Christians face and whether better arguments are enough by addressing the next convincing argument for Side A

#6 Celibacy shouldn’t be forced and doesn’t work for many people…
It’s true – longterm abstinent singleness hasn’t work out well for gay people

But 	– God calls Christians to abstinent singleness outside of opposite-sex Christian marriage
	– Vocational singleness isn’t working because straight people aren’t doing it and churches aren’t supporting it

[Notes]
no one should be forced into celibacy, and celibacy doesn’t work for many people

Side A theologians are right to point out that longterm abstinent singleness hasn’t worked out well for a lot of gay people
But that’s not because Christians have somehow forced gay people into abstinence against God’s will

if you’re a Christian, you are born into, forced into a temporary state of abstinent singleness
We can choose to honor God or not, but the state is automatic.
Scripture is clear that for the Christian, the only God-honoring alternative to opposite-sex Christian marriage is abstaining from sex
Even Jesus, in Matthew 19 verse 12, recognizes that some will be celibate for a lifetime, even thought that’s not their preference

Why, if God actually means for us to be so-called “forced” into abstinence, is this feeling of being forced so distasteful?
Because very few Christians really think vocational singleness is good, despite what Jesus and Paul had to say about it
Because our whole life, we’ve heard straight people teaching other straight people that they only have to be abstinent longterm if they want to be
We’ve heard straight people teach other straight people that romance and marriage are the most beautiful things God created
And then they pity people who are single but dont want to are to be. Pitying never-married women, widows, divorcees, etc.
But then they turn to gay people and tell us that being forced into celibacy is good for us
Of course gay people are going to reject that

Which brings me to the last part
If God means for many of us to be abstinent longterm, but its not working, why?
Well its not because gay people aren’t trying hard enough. We have. We are.

And its not because vocational singleness is somehow less natural than marriage
The reality is, in light of the fall, what comes naturally to us is sex and polyamory
Neither faithful monogamy nor abstinence come naturally to us
Everyone has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for marriage and vocational singleness
And all of us need the gift of either vocational singleness or Christan marriage from God to do it well

So, gay people aren’t finding vocational singleness challenging because its somehow less natural than marriage
Gay people are struggling because because straight people aren’t doing vocational singleness and our churches aren’t supporting it

#6 Celibacy shouldn’t be forced and doesn’t work for many people…
But 	– Churches lead straight Christians to assume romance and marriage, few straight Christians walk out vocational singleness, gay Christians are nearly the only Christians following the singleness of Jesus and Paul
	– Churches don’t teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness, procreation, or divorce + celibates can’t find intimacy and permanent family


[Notes]
Many of our churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married, teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness
As a result, no straight people are seriously considering a life without romance for the sake of the kingdom
gay Christians are nearly the only people who actually consider vocational singleness. Because their circumstances force them to.
And then they are the only Christians actually committing to singleness for the sake of the kingdom in the ways Jesus and Paul describe. But because there are so few gay celibate Christians, the Church doesn’t have to move a finger to support them.
churches can ignore them and neglect to meaningfully invest in the support of celibate people.
That’s why gay celibate Christians are struggling

You see, this is why better arguments aren’t enough
Because if you’re being honest, you’ve got to admit that churches haven’t been teaching what the bible has to say about vocational singleness
Churches haven’t been teaching about what the bible has to say about procreation or divorce
Churches haven’t really been inviting straight people to consider the singleness of Jesus or Paul
Our churches aren’t actually places where those walking out vocational singleness could find the same depth and permanence of family as marriage people
And as a result gay people are the only people walking out vocational singleness and they’re struggling with loneliness, doubt, depression, and suicidality

So telling gay people what the Bible says isn’t enough
You must do what it takes to become churches where gay people could actually thrive in vocational singleness with reasonable effort
We’ll come back to that

In summary, God is actually calling every Christian to abstinence unless they are in an opposite-sex Christian marriage, regardless of our preference
But yes, celibacy isn’t working for a lot of people
But that’s not because God doesn’t mean for us to be abstinent
It’s because the Church is doing a poor job of supporting vocational singleness


#7 Mixed-orientation marriages (MOMs) don’t end well and should be avoided…
It’s true – some MOMs ended disastrously because of secrecy

But 	– MOMs can be healthy with transparency
	– We should not dismiss the possibility for those called to a MOM

[Notes]
The stories of MOMs imploding is proof that MOMs should never be an option

What is a MOM?  Mixed-orientation marriages are opposite-sex marriages where at least one spouse experiences same-sex attraction.

It’s true, many of us have seen the implosion of a MOM that ended in a divorce and hurt everyone involved. 
For decades, pastors and parents told gay people to marry someone of the opposite sex and keep their desires a secret, hoping it would cure their gayness.
But that secrecy was the seed of destruction. 

In response to all of the bad fruit resulting from pushing MOMs, the pendulum has swung to the other extreme.
From the late 2000s to now, many pastors have encouraged all gay people to remain celibate.
They’ve discouraged any gay person from considering a MOM, claiming that they never work and are always unfair to the straight spouse.
So yes, we should be cautious, but if two people feel called to such a marriage, it can be done well.
We shouldn’t pressure people into either vocational singleness or a MOM. We also shouldn’t discredit MOMs.
We typically only hear about the ones that fail, but there are gay people living in beautiful opposite-sex marriages that display the gospel, raising children, and serving in our churches.

Here’s how it can be done well:

First, the gay person needs to share about their sexuality early in the dating process
Recognize that same-sex attraction will likely always be present for the gay person.
You cannot promise someone else that your SSA won’t return.
You must give the other person this information when deciding whether to continue the relationship.
Second, continue to talk about it in marriage.
As with any marriage, communication lines must remain open between spouses.
Spouses need to steward this part of their marriage together.
Third, talk about it with other couples, both MOMs and straight.
Couples in MOMs need other couples in MOMs to talk to – those who “get it” without having to explain everything.
But they also need straight couples to talk to
It’s easy for a couple in a MOM that doesn’t talk with other couples to blame their marital issues on the sexuality of the gay spouse.
But if couples in a MOM share about their challenges with straight couples, they quickly realize that their marital issues are universal challenge that all marriages have to deal with, but they have to share with straight couples to know this!

A key lever for preventing MOMs entered into for the wrong reasons and preventing painful implosions is by making sure vocational singleness must actually be a viable choice.
Among the MOMs that I know that have ended, most of the time the gay person got into the marriage because they believed it was there only option.
So they never really chose the burden and the beauty of marriage.
Unsurprisingly, this did not end well.
Right theology and viable practice of vocational singleness will lead to healthier motivations for entering into MOMs.
If vocational singleness isn’t an option, marriage isn’t either – it becomes a forced choice.
Both MUST be done well for each to be viable.

So in summary, yes, there has been bad fruit of pushing people into MOMs decades ago, but we should not dismiss this possibility for those called to it and who walk this path with transparency

#8 Traditional sexual ethics bears
bad fruit, so it must be wrong…
It’s true – traditional sexual ethics has borne bad fruit in the lives of gay Christians

But 	– there’s just as bad (if not worse) fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
	– it’s the responsibility of pastors and leaders to transform our churches into places where gay Christians are thriving according to God’s teachings

[Notes]
we see the bad fruit of traditional sexual ethics
Therefore the theology must be wrong

I’ll admit, when I look at the lives of gay Christians who have tried to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic, there is a lot of bad fruit
But there’s admittedly just as bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic

Some like to bring up that the average adult same-sex partnership lasts shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
Or that the rates of adultery and infidelity are higher in same-sex marriages
But honestly, that’s a cheap shot
And even if I think those statistics are the result of societal oppression and the bad fruit of not following God’s design,
You’re not going to convince anyone with those statistics

No, what’s personally convincing for me is that most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God.
This has not been true for everyone, but it has been true of most people I know
At first, they did a little bit of theological acrobatics to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages 
But after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said for 2000 years.
They agreed with a majority of queer theologians that the God of the Bible is against gay sex and gay marriage
But they still believe that the real God is for gay marriage, so the Bible must just be outdated
So they get to a place where they don’t believe the Bible is authoritative or binding for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell them who God is, they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
What’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?
So eventually they stop believing in God all together.

I don’t wish that upon anyone…

But, the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic in the lives of my gay friends is losing their faith.

At the same time, there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic.
My gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do.
But just because there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic doesn’t necessarily mean it’s any less true
I’m convinced that gay Christians stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are struggling because our churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship for everyone and loving gay people well.
The problem is our churches’ poor application of God’s wisdom
The solution to the bad fruit we see isn't to abandon a traditional sexual ethic, because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for churches to learn how to better embody a traditional sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people.

But again, we see that better arguments aren’t enough
You must do what it takes to become churches where gay people could actually thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic with reasonable effort
We’ll come back to that

So in summary, yes, there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic, but there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
The problem with a traditional sexual ethic isn’t really the theology, it’s the application, and there’s work to do there





#9 A loving God wouldn’t
deny me a loving marriage…
It’s true – straight Christians have taught that marriage is primarily about commitment and companionship

But 	– the Bible + Church have consistently taught that Christian marriage (joined, sustained by God) is a lifetime union between a man and woman to raise children and embody the gospel

[Notes]
God is love
Marriage is about love
So God wouldn’t deny me marriage

I’ll admit that many straight Christians taught that marriage is merely about companionship and commitment
And that they’ve taught that God wants that for everyone
But those teachings can’t be found in Scripture
And love is more complex than that

Side A theologians often argue that straight Christians believe Christian marriage is primarily about two people loving each other and serving God together, so if a same-sex couple fulfills those requirements, why wouldn’t God bless that union in the same way?

The problem is that this definition of marriage is not how the Bible or the Church have taught about Christian marriage.
Christian marriage—joined, blessed, and sustained by God—is a lifetime vocation between a man and a women to raise children, enjoy intimacy with each other, and embody the relationship in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church in specific ways (particularly the complementarity—both in mind and body—of the sexes joined in sex for the purposes of having and raising children).


#9 A loving God wouldn’t
deny me a loving marriage…
But 	– same-sex couples do not fulfill God’s narrow design for Christian marriage, but neither do many opposite-sex marriages
	– real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things God has to offer and helping them take hold of that
	– love = orthodoxy + empathy

[Notes]
A same-sex couple does not fulfill that purpose.

But neither do a lot of opposite-sex marriages
God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the marriage of your opposite-sex non-Christian neighbors.
God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the opposite-sex Christian marriage using their vows as a permission slip for sex while blocking the possibility of children.
God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the opposite-sex marriage of Christians who were previously in different Christians marriages that ended with biblical grounds for divorce.
We don’t want to be honest about how jealous God is about Christian marriage and what He blesses.
Too often, leaders are willing to speak the truth when it offends gay people on the streets but not when it offends straight people in our churches.

You see, the problem is few churches have been teaching what the Bible really has to say about Christian marriage
That definition of Christian marriage as companionship + commitment + Jesus is just the idolatry of romance from the sexual revolution with Jesus sprinkled on top

Still, some would say, “I don’t care what the Bible says, God is love, so God must be for love, whatever form it takes.”
The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,” that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that
It’s saying that the God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers
how do we know what God wants to offer us? The consistent teachings of the Bible and the Church
Let’s call that Christian orthodoxy

but it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things
we have to help people take hold of them
we have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive
So love = empathy + orthodoxy
empathy without orthodoxy isn’t love
orthodoxy without empathy isn’t love
If we want to imitate God and love people, we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to Christian orthodoxy and help them do so

So in summary, Christian marriage is about much more than commitment and companionship
And love is more than just giving people what they want
God is clear in Scripture His best for us
And if we truly love people, we will help them take hold of those best things


Churches must become places of thriving

[Notes]
So we’ve covered the 9 most convincing arguments for a progressive sexual ethic
I’ve modeled responding winsomely
And, we’ve pointed out that better arguments alone aren’t enough
I’ve pointed out that churches must do what it takes to help gay Christians stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic actually thrive
Our churches have got to become places where, with reasonable effort, gay Christians bear good fruit from a traditional sexual ethic

So how can churches do that?
A Vision for Thriving
Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the questions gay people face
Every kid knows God’s love and wisdom for gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to gay people
Gay people thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
With our last couple of minutes, I was to provide a vision for what it looks like to be churches where gay Christians can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic

First, churches need to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
We must teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness during which we discern whether we are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom or a lifetime vocation of Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
Our churches should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations and that every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
Plus, our churches need to teach that regardless of our vocation, God has made all of us for intimacy in the context of human family, including those called to vocational singleness
 
Second, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?
As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches need to talk about the possibility of same-sex attraction in age-appropriate ways across the lifespan so that teens don’t wait 5 years to tell a parent or pastor and spend 5 years making sense of their sexuality all by themselves with the lies of the Enemy.
Before teens realizes they experience same-sex attraction, teens need to hear that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about,
that we won’t try to fix them,
that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then, when teens realize their same-sex attractions, they would quickly share with their parents and pastors, inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways.
 
Fourth, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression, these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And fifth, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.
Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find, whether that be through intentional Christian communities or living with a married couple.
Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people, cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.

That’s just a brief vision of what it looks like to be churches where gay Christians can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
If we had another hour together, I’d tease out each of those 5 and explore the practical steps your churches can take
But we’re out of time for now

FREE conversation
about practical steps

pieter@equipyourcommunity.org

[Notes]
If any of you would like to continue conversation about practical steps for realizing this vision
Please do not hesitate to contact me at pieter@equipyourcommunity
I’d be happy to discuss over email or set up a free conversation

Until them, I pray that when you’re presented with an opportunity to respond to arguments for Side A theology, you’ll be careful
You’ll be winsome
And recognize when better arguments aren’t enough
I pray that you’ll admit that churches that teach a traditional sexual ethic must become places where gay Christians could actually thrive and bear good fruit while following God’s wisdom
And I pray that you’ll do something about it
Amen? Amen!

