

Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic published in places like Christianity Today and for over 65 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip—the premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
We’ve trained over 11,000 Christian leaders
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to kingdom singleness
 
And I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to be because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic (a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom).






Traditional sexual ethic:
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom


my story

[Notes]
I want to share how I think God is inviting me to steward my sexuality in life-giving ways
How those of you who are gay can thrive according to God’s wisdom
And how those of you who are straight can better love your gay brothers
 
But before we do that, I want to share a little bit about my story
 
Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that, and I felt very alone
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers, went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation, and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay
 
Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry. I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts. I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired. And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university. The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
 
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year I shared with you guys
after a gay brother was kicked out of our Christian fraternity, I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity. I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better. These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
 
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
Those realizations were the beginnings of EQUIP, the ministry I started 7 years ago, and NFOB, the monastery I started 3 years ago



What do I believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.

[Notes]
I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction—me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay—is a result of the Fall. When Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. The introduction of sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first intended us. 
 
I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world he would have expected me to be experience same-sex attraction. But because I was born into a broken world one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin. It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold my attractions against me. God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls.






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
Sexual orientation change efforts are harmfully ineffective
What do I believe?

[Notes]
I do not believe people choose who they are attracted to: choose to be gay or straight. The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to. There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation. Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants, but scientific studies show that only 3-4% of people report experiencing any meaningful change in their same-sex attractions. And studies have shown that SOCEs nearly double the risk of suicide.







God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.
What do I believe?

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to vocational singleness—to give up the prospect of romance, dating, sex, marriage, and children to do kingdom work parents don’t have the time or energy to do--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context
 
For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women have been in a couple of relationships with women where I grew a desire for them specifically so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work but more important than what I want, I started asking God about 7 years ago what He wants. Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness? And about 5 years ago I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So 5 years ago some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers



WHY?


[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”
I’m not going to get into those. I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are
No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design






Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singlness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel
you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best






But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
My gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
but even if I wasn’t convinced logically of a biblical sexual ethic, I couldn’t ignore the evidence I see in my own life and the lives of others that a progressive sexual ethic isn’t God’s best
 I couldn’t ignore the bad fruit of in my life and the lives of others who believe that God blesses same-sex Christian marriages in the same way He blessed opposite-sex Christian marriages

In particular, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God after 5 of so years

At first, these friends performed impressive theological acrobatics to read Scripture to say that God fully blesses same-sex marriages. But eventually, most of these friends admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve consistently understood it to say for 2000 years. These friends were convinced that God fully blesses same-sex marriages, but concluded that the Bible is not binding or authoritative for modern people. Yet once they concluded that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is, they realize they were just worshiping a God they came up with.


Let me be clear: I want all of my friends to have robust relationships with God. It pains me to see this consistent pattern. But the fruit of a progressive sexual ethic that I see in the lives of my gay friends is them losing their faith.







Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

The Church MUST do better.
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
On the other hand, my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do. This is because churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me. I think that’s the double burden of Christians who are gay: churches don’t know how to love us well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either.
 
Yet even if churches are failing to love and care for people like me, that doesn’t make something that is bad for me now good for me; that doesn’t change something from being a sin to being edifying to God.
 
Why did God make the world this way? I don’t know. At the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job. I must trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings.
 
I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a traditional sexual ethic because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic.



SOLUTION


[Notes]
no, I think the solution is for churches to learn how to better embody a biblical sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people



Solution for Good



Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
We’ve got to start inviting every Christian to think theologically about their sexual stewardship and to take seriously what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness for straight people, God’s purposes for marriage, and unbiblical divorce and remarriage
 
We’ve got to make sure everyone in our churches know about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, and in particular kids so that they never have to make sense of their sexuality alone in the closet
 
We have to become churches where every Christian considers vocational singleness and could find permanent, lived-in family in lifetime singleness
 
I think if we do these things, our churches can become a places that offer gay people something undeniably better than the empty promises of the world
We can be a place where gay Christians find more beauty and connection from following God’s teachings than from seeking out romantic relationships with people of the same sex



6 TIPS


[Notes]
So I’ve shared with you my story and how I understand God thinks about these questions
I want to wrap up with some practical advice for everybody.
First I want to speak to the straight people in the room.
I’ve got three suggestions.



Straight People: Tips



Do your homework
Take your sexual stewardship seriously
Give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness too

[Notes]
First, do your homework
we all need to know how to speak into these topics in theologically accurate and compassionate ways
whether its a conversation with friends or with family members, how you speak about this matters—your words can either point people to the love and Lordship of Jesus, or it can become a barrier to gay people knowing God or enable painful choices
But I want to encourage you not to make your gay friends be your teacher
Instead, I want to encourage you to do your own homework
I’ll send a reading list to yall through Mark
please don’t default, out of laziness, to holding a traditional sexual ethic in an way that lacks compassion
but also, please don’t default, out of laziness and a fear of being perceived as mean, to a progressive sexual ethic
because when straight people in my church hold a progressive sexual ethic, it makes it more difficult for me to hold a traditional sexual ethic
When I’m having doubts about my convictions, I need my straight brothers and sisters to hold me up
But instead, if my straight brothers and sisters are just adding to my doubts, they make it easier for me to capitulate to an ethic that may be harmless for straight people to hold but has drug many of my gay friends into unbelief
 
Second, take your sexual stewardship seriously
over the past few decades most churches have continued to teach that God would never bless a gay marriage
but they’ve relaxed their teachings on casual dating, child-rearing, and divorce and remarriage for straight people
gay people take note of this discriminatory application of scripture
we look for an explanation of why, and the only thing we can come up with is homophobia
and this victim mentality makes it very difficult for us to continue holding ourselves to God’s high standard of sexual stewardship
and accepting accountability from others to that high standard
when straight people are called to a lower standard
so help out by holding yourself to a high, biblical standard of sexual stewardship
ask yourself tough questions about whether casual dating is a misuse of pleasure
take seriously the consistent teachings of Scripture and the Church that Christian marriage is a space for sacrificially raising children, among other things
and take seriously the consistent teachings of Scripture and the Church that there are also no grounds for Christian divorce and remarriage
even when it’s inconvenient
because God’s good teachings are really inconvenient for gay people like me, but we still follow them
 
Okay, and third (and kind of related to the previous one)
give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness too
take seriously what the bible has to say about the lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention
really consider that singleness of Jesus and Paul
the Scripture say that God wants to call some of you to that
would you pause to listen?
would you open-handedly receive whichever gift God says is better for you?
even if it’s not the one you prefer?
that helps gay people, because currently gay Christians committed to a traditional sexual ethic are some of the only people committing to lifetime vocational singleness
so because of our small numbers, churches can ignore the call to teach out our vocation in scripture or take practical steps to offer us lifelong, lived-in family in our churches
but if 10% of straight Christians accepted God’s call to lifetime vocational singleness, pastors would finally listen to the voices of celibate people, teach us, and support us
so discern






Follow Jesus, no matter the cost
Seek out family
Integrate your sexuality, instead of serving it or shaming it
Gay People: Tips

[Notes]
And last but not least, I want to talk to the gay people in the room.
I’ve got three suggestions for yall. These are less prescriptive, and more just take-away’s from my own journey.
 
First, I want to encourage you to follow Jesus, no matter the apparent cost
I know its hard and unfair, but following God’s teachings are better than the alternative
I’ve shared already about my personal experiences and the consistent experiences of gay people around me
I guess I just hope you can learn from my mistakes
I know the feeling of trying to steward your sexualities according to a biblical sexual ethic and feeling lonely and perhaps even depressed and crying out to God, “this couldn’t possibly be your best for me”
and yet, for the gay Christian, in order to submit your life fully to God
and find the most richness and beauty in this life, I’ve seen that we have to accept some hard things
We see that it is unfair and unjust
We see that it will probably continue to be that way
We see that we could reasonably use that to justify doing what we want
But we are convinced that God knows better for us than the wisdom of the age
We are convinced that following Jesus will be worth the cost
We are convinced that picking up our crosses will be better
No matter how painful, no matter how much suffering
Because it is in following Christ’s example by taking on suffering for a purpose that we will find ourselves and find the God whom we were created to be in relationship with
You might ask: what’s the point of my suffering?
Well, I can’t say for every gay Christian
for me, it’s helped me see the pain of people of color and immigrants and poor people and the mentally ill so much better
I want to fight for them
and it helps me fight for other gay people
in ways that I could never if I were straight or if I had not accepted the suffering
I have fully accepted that I cannot undo the pain I have experienced
and things might not change in churches fast enough for me to experience something meaningfully better
but if I can spend my life—suffer—so that the next generation of gay teens experiences something radically better than I did
that’s worth it
100 time that’s worth it
I would choose this life over and over again
So please, follow Jesus, no matter the apparent cost, because I’m convinced it will be worth it
 
Second, seek out family
just as I said earlier, we were all created for intimacy with God and other humans
we need that in spiritual, emotional, and physical ways
none of us can make it through this life alone, and that is no less true of gay people
Please don’t be afraid or ashamed of asking others in this community to be family for you
ask them to be a part of their lives
you could even try to start an intentional Christian community with single and married folk
Whatever you do, find family
And I’ll add one little piece of advice that I’ve found helpful: I’ve seen that if I want to be a part of my married friends’ lives, particularly once they’ve had children, I’ve got to be willing to inconvenience myself. To be a part of their family on their terms, because despite the challenges of singleness, raising children is a different kind of hardship than I will probably ever know
 
Third, I want to encourage you to find a way to integrate your sexuality, instead of serving it or shaming it
It’s probably obvious why I would discourage the gay Christian from letting their sexuality dictate the priorities in their life, and I’ll note that straight Christians do this just as often, just perhaps in ways that we’ve become blinded to. There’s an idolatry of romance among straight Christians combined with an acceptance of no-fault divorce and remarriage that straight Christians should find much more troubling than rainbow flags and unicorns.
So I’ll speak to the other: integrating your sexuality instead of being ashamed of it
for a long time I tried to pretend like I was just like every straight person
that there wasn’t anything different about my story or more difficult about the prospects before me
but that just minimized my pain and gave me no space to mourn the injustice in this world
it also nurtured homophobia in my own heart
I first started integrating my sexuality by sharing about it—by sharing my story
this helped remove a lot of shame and helped me identify in helpful ways with how I am different and how God has redeemed that for my good and His glory
then as I started recognizing that my story was different and there were ways I felt more connected to gay people than to straight people, and I gave myself permission to experience that affinity
for me, that looked like calling myself gay, seeing myself as connected to the gay civil rights movement, seeing myself connected to the hate crimes against gay people, and giving myself permission to enjoy gay artists and cultural elements
again, Christ is still the only person that sits on the throne of my life
and everything I do is submitted to His wisdom
and at the same time, there are beautiful aspects of gay culture as a minority culture born out of oppression that are healthy for me to connect with, strengthen my faith, and help me better empathize with others



QUESTIONS?







Connect with Pieter at
me@pieterLvalk.com

Learn more at
pieterLvalk.com
Connect & Learn
