

of
Pieter Valk

[Notes]
Hello, I am Pieter Valk

Note about questions


Valentine’s Day,
the Idol of Romance,
& the Call to Singleness

[Notes]
Today, on the day before Valentine’s Day, I’m excited to explore with you guys what I’ll call the idol of romance
And in contrast, the need for every Christian young adult to discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage


Pieter Valk

[Notes]
I was recently published in Christianity Today speaking about the need for discernment and more vocational singleness in our churches. Feel free to go to christianitytoday.com, save the article, read it after our conversation tonight, and share it on social media with friends and family. It may seem like a small thing, but spreading the word about discernment and vocational singleness can make a big difference in the church!

But before we get started, I want to share a little bit more about me
And why what I have to say about these topics has any weight

I studied at Vanderbilt University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Lipscomb University
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and one day a week I serve as a licensed professional counselor for people trying to make sense of faith and sexuality

The rest of the week, I’m the Executive Director of EQUIP
We’re a team of missionary consultants who help churches become places where gay people can belong and thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic—according to a belief that God’s best for every Christian is vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

Outside of work, I’m the cofounder of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenically Christian brotherhood where men called to vocational singleness can live together permanently. We practice shared rhythms of daily prayer and confession, weekly meals, monthly worship, and regular vacations and holidays. Plus, we invest in the mission and community of our local churches, leverage our 9-to-5 jobs for the sake of the kingdom, and enjoy fellowship with parents and their kids in our churches and neighborhood.

Oh, and one other thing. I’m gay. I’m a Christian. And I too am convinced that God’s best for every Christian is vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. Including me. I hesitate to share this. I’m worried you’ll dismiss everything I have to say about discernment and vocational singleness because my story is different. ”Oh, Pieter is gay and committed to a traditional sexual ethic, so he’s forced into celibacy, but I, a straight person, don’t really have to consider celibacy.” I’ll share more later about why I’m convinced every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern with God whether He is calling them to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

But here’s what I’ll say about my story and why my journey is relevant to straight people. While I’m not bisexual—I don’t generally find women to be attractive—I dated a couple of women in college, shared with them about my sexuality, and developed specific attractions for them. So I knew that if God wanted me to marry, I could. But 5 years ago I started feeling this urging from the Holy Spirit to ask God if He had a preference instead of just taking what I wanted. I started asking God, “What do you have for me? Do you want me to get married? Do you want me to commit to lifetime singleness? Do you want me to leave both doors open?” After three years of asking this question and discovering that all Christians used to ask God this question, I become convinced that God was calling me to vocational singleness. You see, I have not been forced into celibacy. Both vocational singleness and Christian marriage were options for me. I have committed to vocational singleness and shut the door on Christian marriage because God called me to it. That’s why my story is still relevant to straight people. Because I had a choice too.




What is the Idol of Romance? What does it promise? What does it cost?

In contrast, what has God made us for?

What is vocational singleness? Why should every Christian consider it?




Three Questions


The IDOL of ROMANCE

[Notes]
What is the Idol of Romance? What does it promise? What does it cost?



What is an idol?



A God substitute that tempts us with false promises
to serve our own desires,
disobey God’s wisdom, and
take what only God can provide

[Notes]
what is an idol? (discussion of some of the points below)
something other than God that we put in the place of God
something we obey or give power to instead of the ways God has called us to obey him
something that tempts us to make God's priorities secondary

often, to serve our own desires instead of obeying God's wisdom

false promise to provide something only God can give and has ordered to give in a different way



What is romance?



romance (n.) - an emotional desire for sensual love with another person AND the courtship behaviors undertaken by an individual to express those feelings on a trajectory of erotic love

[Notes]
When I use the word romance in this presentation, this is what I mean
There are certainly broader definitions of romance that include a certain period of classical music and healthy emotions toward a parent or sibling
But I’m looking for a word and a definition to describe more narrowly what people have typically associated uniquely with dating and marriage

Romance is an emotional desire for sensual love with another person, often involving the idealization of the other, and the courtship behaviors undertaken by an individual to express those feelings on a trajectory of erotic love

Greek word eros
Magical feeling
At least historically, a desire for exclusivity
More than friends
Characterized by certain physical intimacy, although there's overlap



The Idol of Romance



Promises pleasure + escape from loneliness
Tempts us to take what we want
Costs us abortion, contraception, divorce, adultery, casual connection, and codependency

[Notes]
so the idol of romance promises us love, belonging, family, pleasure, an escape from loneliness
how does it tempt us? to take what we want
to use abortion, contraception, divorce, adultery, casual connection, codependency, etc. to get the pleasure and escape we want

I didn't say "idol of marriage" for a reason
God's good design for Christian marriage isn't the problem
the real problem is romance: if someone has gained 50 pounds and rip their pants, the problem isn't the pants
it's the presumption of marriage, the unquestioned indulgence of romance and unthinking pursuit of marriage that is the problem

We value romance more than marriage, family, and fidelity

and it starts when we're kids




From an early age…



Bible stories and holidays about romance and marriage
“When you get married…”
“Are you dating anyone?”
No celebration or stories about vocational singleness

[Notes]
We grow up reading Bible stories that highlight the importance of family. My childhood church celebrated Mother’s Day and Father’s Day as religious holidays, only trumped by Easter and Christmas. From an early age, parents tell you that they are praying for your future spouse. They say, “When you are married...” and “When you have kids...” They make jokes with your friend’s parents about arranged marriages. Starting in high school, adults of every age in my church would ask me if I was dating anyone, and the volume of these questions jumped from sleepy-time lullaby to death-metal-rock-concert loud once I graduated from college.

Then there’s what isn’t said. Our churches don’t highlight bible stories that value lifetime singleness. My storybook Bible didn’t celebrate the celibacy of Paul or Jesus. There were no television shows focused on people who chose to be single in order to serve their community. No one modeled lifetime singleness at my church or at my dinner table. My church and parents never recognized singleness for the Lord as an equally good possibility.



Teens & Romance



Christian teens assume they are free to indulge in romance as much as they want, as long as they don’t cross certain lines.

Is Christian casual dating practice for divorce?

[Notes]
Christian teens assume they are free to indulge in romance as much as they want, as long as they don't cross certain lines
as long as they follow certain rules

Over the next decade, these Christian boys and girls will be in a handful of long term relationships. They connect deeply in emotional and physical ways, and regardless of whether the relationship lasts for one month or three years, the end is the same: Christians must learn to abruptly disconnect and detach from another. This is painful, so the Christian learns to desensitize himself to the pain, hardening the Christian’s heart and creating barriers to future healthy intimacy. Do you ever wonder how we seem to get better at breakups with practice? It’s almost like we are developing muscles for connecting and disconnecting while minimizing the consequences. No wonder divorce seems so easy.

Again, the problem is the presumption and the unexamined pursuit



Fear of Singleness



72% of pastors believe “If a person desires to marry and have kids, then God wants them to marry”

Singles struggle more with depression + anxiety, doubting God’s existence, and rebounding from doubt

[Notes]
When pastors were surveyed about their beliefs on this specific topic, only 28% were willing to disagree with the following statement: If a person desires to marry and have kids, then God wants them to marry. I’ve heard multiple friends share with me some version of the following: “Certainly, God wouldn’t let me have desires for these good things unless He planned to give them to me.” Nevermind the daily desires we each face for good things that we nevertheless refrain from because they are not the best things for us. These friends choose to believe that their desires, successfully dating an attractive person, and falling in love are all signs of God’s providence, preference, and blessing. They never stop to examine the origins or consequences of these theologically problematic beliefs.

And I don’t blame them. I know how practically challenging lifetime singleness is. If I could slip into a blissfully ignorant assumption that God wants me to realize all of my romantic desires, I would, just as quickly. A 2008 study found that single people are more likely to struggle with loneliness, depression, and anxiety.v Another study found that loneliness is a bigger health risk than smoking or obesity.vi Many single people are plagued with doubt about whether God exists because we don’t experience a physical embodiment of God’s love in the form of family. A 2017 study found that single people were less likely to rebound from doubt and more likely to lose their faith.vii No, I’m not surprised or mad when my Christian friends assume God has marriage for them and go take it.



The Church is complicit



“…has leaked into the church and informed its practices of ‘true love waits’ seminars, ‘kissing dating goodbye’ and ‘women captivating men who are wild at heart.’”

Christians sell abstinence with the promise of marriage + sex

[Notes]
or to put it another way, Kutter Callaway wrote a book titled "Breaking the Marriage Idol"
sidenote: he didn't chose the title, and he's personally told me he wishes it was titled "breaking the romance idol"
anyway, here's was Kutter's book says:
He notices an intriguing pattern: that a culture of Disney princesses, serial sexual monogamous relationships leading to relational skepticism (as paraded in the lyrics of Taylor Swift), and the “multiple intimate relationship for seeking true love” paradigm (broadcasted on The Bachelor and The Bachelorette) has leaked into the church and informed its practices of “true love waits” seminars, “kissing dating goodbye” and “women captivating men who are wild at heart.”
Callaway believes that the church has adopted a view of romantic relationships which sees sexual intimacy within marriage as the pinnacle of a fulfilled life. Much Christian literature funneled towards teens contains a baptized version of a Disney fairytale as it promises your “true soulmate” who will complete you and uses sex to sell abstinence: “if you are abstinent now, you will have amazing sex when you are married” (p. 66). Those who are putting off dating relationships as teenagers are still assuming that marriage is in their future. In his own words, “we simply cannot escape the fact that when cast in terms of the princess paradigm, singleness is a state of radical incompletion, romantic love is a self-justifying good, and marriage is an end in itself” (p. 72).



Idol of Romance



The average Christian assumes…
they can have romance if they want it
their desires tells them God's desires

(often with ruinous results)

[Notes]
in summary:
average Christian assumes they can have romance if they want it
assumes that their desires tells them about God's desires
unthinkingly choose
often with ruinous results



Share



Where have you seen the Idol of Romance at work?

What destructive results of this idolatry have you noticed?


What has God made us for?

[Notes]
In contrast, what has God made us for?



God’s invitation to love



God has a preference whether He wants us to pursue vocational singleness or Christian marriage

God wants us to open-handedly discern and seek His preference

[Notes]
but scripture offers something different
God has a preference for each of us--whether vocational singleness or Christian marriage would personally be better for each of us
we are all born into a temporary, uncommitted singleness and ought to open-handedly discern God’s preference
instead of taking what we want, God invites us to ask God what He wants for us

I hope that most of you have heard biblical teaching about Christian marriage
and recognize the ways that genuine, biblical marriage actually challenges the idol of romance

so where I want to spend the short time we have together is on this idea of discernment and this calling of vocational singleness
And the ways it in particular challenges in the idol of romance






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Let’s break down this definition of vocational singleness






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
It’s a calling. God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness. And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference
but Why?









Why? Because God has a preference
Where? Matt 19 + 1 Cor 7
A vocation should not be forced
Why Discern?

[Notes]
Why?

Because God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

Now, you might point out that in verse 12 Jesus says that some “choose” the vocation of singleness.
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?
Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.
Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.






A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness. 
Why Discern?

[Notes]
now a single person might push back
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural
Therefore, I don’t need to discern

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And more practically, we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

Scripture speaks of a gift, a provision of grace to do each of those well.
Scripture does not teach—and the Church has not taught—that God provides this same kind of special gift for those in temporary singleness.
Christians have historically understood these gifts of marriage and vocational singleness to involve both a willingness to accept the call and a provision to thrive in the call.

A common interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:9 is that poor sexual stewardship in singleness shows that one has not been given the gift of singleness and should instead marry.
Now, it’s more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.

As mentioned earlier, none of us inherently have what we need to do marriage or celibacy well. We will not receive the portion of grace to do either of those vocations until we accept the call and step into the vocation as God designed it.






Temporary vs. Vocational Singleness
Waiting vs. permanently giving up romance/marriage/sex /children for kingdom
Temporary singles often shallowly invested in community and kingdom work
Jesus and Paul commend lifetime singleness
Must step into vocational singleness to receive the gift
Why Discern?

[Notes]
Another reason to discern is that there’s a big difference between the temporary, uncommitted singleness we’re all born into
And committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.

There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

Additionally, those who continue indefinitely in temporary singleness are likely to be shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and uncommitted to the kingdom work they’re doing because they have to stay prepared to reorganize their lives around a (potential) spouse at any moment.
Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness--they’re commending vocational singleness.
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.

That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness. For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage in their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life. While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.   






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
But it’s not just a calling. It’s a lifetime calling.
God intends for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent. We cannot imagine Jesus providing the 100-fold blessing promised in Luke 18:28-30 to someone who has only temporarily given up the prospect of marriage and children, only to later get married. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness than get married. Then in 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul reaffirms that a commitment to vocational singleness is good and to break that commitment is a sin.

PLUS EARLY CHURCH UNDERSTANDING

So again, is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no
but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, Max Thurian, and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift, if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly
how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?
DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness. And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference






“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, sex, and children, but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children. And then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship.

But, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family. In Isaiah 56:3-5, the celibate is promised family, belonging, and honor equal to the married person, that they will be full and equal members of the family of God, that they will be spiritual parents in ways just as great as biological parents. In Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:36-38, Paul recognizes that those called to celibacy still need committed companionship by commending the now-outlawed spiritual betrothals present in the early Church. Then in 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul recognizes early families of celibate people by commending a committed community of celibate women.



Share



What hesitations do you have to inviting every Christian to discern between vocational singleness and marriage?

How meaningful is this distinction between temporary singleness and vocational singleness? What are the benefits of separating versus conflating these two ideas?


[Notes]
Additional Q’s

What’s lacking in the evidence from Scripture and the early Church that the singleness Jesus and Paul spoke of was intended to be permanent?

How might a permanent giving up of romance and dating free those called to vocational singleness to focus on kingdom work and their spiritual family?



WHY vocational singleness?

[Notes]
Now that we know what vocational singleness is, now let’s explore why God calls some people to this lifetime vocation of singleness.






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Why does God call some to Vocational Singleness?
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness. Those called to vocational singleness live “for the sake of the kingdom” in three ways:

God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time, energy, or financial freedom to do. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus invites his disciples to consider giving up the potential for spouse and children in order to live “like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom,” referring to Old Testament eunuchs who commonly worked for a king, managing and building up the king’s kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church. In 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul commends faithful members of the community of celibate women who have fully committed themselves to the Lord.

2 kids = 20 years of 40-hour workweeks
That means that vocational singles, leveraging all their time and energy for kingdom work other than raising kids, can do 50% more
And they can afford to be paid half as less because they don’t have to pay for double food and housing costs for kids

Story about talking to NATE

Vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel. Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love found in God’s family (the Trinity and between Christ and the Church), preaching the gospel by reflecting that love. Vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love.






Diverse – differentness of personalities, sexes, ages
Intimate – still a call to family, fullness of God’s love in NHNE
Faithful – permanent and lifetime, consistent kingdom work
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now, let’s look at the ways singleness for the sake of the kingdom embodies those six characteristics of love found in the Trinity and between Christ and His Church.


1. Vocational singleness is diverse. The friendships enjoyed by those committed to vocational singleness reflect the diversity in God’s family. There is a differentness between the persons in each friendship. Plus, vocational singles still need healthy relationships with people of the opposite sex, parents, and children. Vocational singleness is still a call to a diversity of friendships with people of all ages and stages of life. This differentness points observers back to the complementarity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church as well as the unity found in the body of Christ even amidst differences.

2. Vocational singleness is intimate. As already mentioned, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of family. Jesus and Paul recognize vocational singles’ need for committed companionship and promise a 100-fold of family in this lifetime (reference). This intimacy points observers back to the intimacy in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. The family vocational singles enjoy testifies to the fullness of God’s love and gives every Christian hope for how we will all live in the New Heavens and New Earth.

3. Vocational singleness is faithful. The permanent, lifetime nature of a commitment to vocational singleness reflects the faithfulness of God’s love found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. Through this vocation, those called faithfully live out their singleness for the Lord consistently build up the kingdom in ways that point back to the faithfulness of the love in God’s family.







Life-giving – spiritually procreative and more kingdom work
Sacrificial – give up idol of romance to follow Jesus
Hospitable – offer family to lonely
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
4. Vocational singleness is life-giving. While those called to vocational singleness do not bear biological children, their availability for kingdom works should bear the fruit of many times more spiritual children. The vocationally single have the time and energy to share the gospel with more not-yet-believers and mentor more new Christians than parents can. Plus, those called to vocational singleness reflect the procreative nature of God’s love by building up the kingdom and bringing spiritual life to the Church.

5. Vocational singleness is sacrificial. At first glance, those called to vocational singleness have chosen to give up their right to some of our culture’s most coveted experiences: romance, dating, marriage, and sex. The sacrifice of vocational singles points observers back to the sacrificial nature of the love in God’s family.

6. Vocational singleness is hospitable. Those called to vocational singleness have the unique opportunity to offer family to those on the margins without the need to compete for belonging. This hospitality reflects the welcoming nature of the love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth 
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth. In Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth. So vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE. 
Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christians called to vocational singleness fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, more belonging, and more honor than married people, they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us. 

But today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family. Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection; and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.

After then I encourage you to do to NFOB’s Instagram…






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

Vocational singleness is a lifetime call to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
It is supposed to be a vocation that is just as beautiful as marriage, both practically and theologically. Isaiah 56:3-5 promises those called to vocational singleness family, belonging, and honor equal to married people, that they will be full and equal members of the family of God, and that they will be spiritual parents in ways just as great as biological parents. In Matthew 19:1-12 Jesus suggests that the average Jew should now consider vocational singleness, lifting up vocational singleness from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian. In Luke 18:28-30 Jesus promises an 100-fold blessing to those called to vocational singleness, suggesting it is equal, if not greater. And in 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul shows a preference for vocational singleness and describes it as practically superior.





Questions: Which of these “for the sake of the kingdom” aspects of vocational singleness are new to you? Most moving? Why?





Share



Which of these “for the sake of the kingdom” aspects of vocational singleness are new to you? Most moving? Why?
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth

[Notes]




HOW can churches better support?

[Notes]
How can churches better support those called to vocational singleness? 






TEACH Vocational Singleness 
teach about the possibility of vocational singleness from a young age
build anticipation for the day when they will ask God for His preference
equip teens with a capacity for general Christian discernment
Better Support

[Notes]
From a young age, parents, teachers, and other leaders can teach our children about the possibilities of both Christian marriage and vocational singleness

Teach about the need for discernment, building anticipation for a future when they will ask God for his preference

Pastors can equip teenagers with a healthy theology of both vocations and a capacity for general Christian discernment.

Then when Christians begin deliberately discerning in their early 20s, pastors can offer four suggestions for wise discernment:






2. Help Christians DISCERN
Grow their “spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work they might be called to
Consider their past and current circumstances
Provide support as a church
Better Support

[Notes]
Help those in temporary singleness in your church discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or marriage

Here’s what that could look like practically:

First, Before we start discerning any specific questions, we need to help people develop their ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do they know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of their question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Second, make sure their are no emotional or theological hurdles to either vocation
We want to clear out any biases against either vocation so that we can better receive God’s call
This might look like studying theology of both marriage and vocational singleness to make sure you have a healthy understanding of both
We also need to take care any emotional hurdles, any past experiences that bias us against either vocation on an emotional level
Perhaps for you that’s the idol of romance or divorce in their family
All of these may bias their discernment in harmful ways
So we need to help people work through any biases they might have so they can more clearly hear God’s preference

Third, help them consider what kind of work they might be called to, and see if that points them toward vocational singleness or marriage
If it feels like the primary work they’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then they’re probably called to marriage
Or if they feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then they’re probably called to vocational singleness

Fourth, help them consider their past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from their past pointed their toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps they find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to a vocation of singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to lifetime singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Fifth, provide support as a church in the discernment process. Bring mentors to lead them in this process. Invite feedback from friends and family about their discernment. These people can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.









3. Cultivate FAMILY for Singles
Help celibate people stay in, join, or build family in the body of Christ.
Better Support

[Notes]
in general, help them have a better experience of family in the body of Christ
Large church fellowship
Diverse small groups
Invite singles to couples-only activities
Ask single people what they need and how they want to serve
but celibate people need intimate, committed relationships, just like their married friends
They need a family of companions who they know will be there in a decade
The people who will be their for dinner at night, or to hear about their day, or to go on vacation with them

So we can help them find their inner family?






3. Cultivate FAMILY for Singles
Stay with biological family
Join another nuclear family
Create families of celibate people
Better Support

[Notes]
Here’s 3 ways celibate people can find family:

First, we can encourage people to stay deeply connected to their biological family. This might look like living with a parent, a sibling, or a cousin, doing rhythms of family with those people, and committing to helping them raise the children in that household.

Or, you might help single people knit themselves into unrelated nuclear families in your church. Maybe people go out of their way to choose celibate people as godparents for their children. Or you invite single people to weekly dinner with your family. Or include them in holidays and vacations. You could even invite single people to live in your home, commit to your family, and help you raise your kids.

Or third, you can help celibate people create families of their own
Help celibate people gather together and commit to being family for each other and doing rhythms of family together.
This is perhaps the least conventional of the options suggested here, and while it might be the most beautiful, it also involved the most logistics.
Churches can help support celibate people in creating these intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it, providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and maybe even providing financial support in the early years.

Ex) I’ve already shared about how some of us are trying to do this with the Nashville Family of Brothers. The pastor at my church has been instrumental
WHAT THOMAS SAID
 in suggesting the idea, supporting us through the process, providing wisdom, and leading a public ceremony where we made first commitments.

This is the kind of solution the Church needs

Regardless of which path they take, celibate people need intimate, committed, and permanent family just like everyone else
You’ve noticed that each solution involves living together and commitment
We need to help celibate people find that
Because it is particularly hard for celibate people to find that
And the paths are often unconventional


QUESTIONS?

[Notes]
So, what is vocational singleness?
Let’s start with some groundwork



Groundwork



1. God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.

2. Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

[Notes]
God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.
How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.

But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids. In Matthew 12:46-50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family, rejecting familial ties based solely on biology and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ

We are all made for family, but we need a broader, more biblical definition of human family. This is important, because as we talk about vocational singleness, I want you to remember that vocational singleness is just as much a call to human family!
 




Groundwork



3. We don’t need romance, sex, or marriage, and that is good news.

4. We have emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual intimacy needs.


[Notes]
Some caveats or limitations about this intimacy in the context of family:

We don’t need romance, sex, or marriage, and that is good news.
We don’t actually need romance or marriage or sex to meet our needs for intimacy. The Bible never promises marriage or sex to people who follow God, and nowhere does God say we need marriage or sex to be whole, happy people. (PIETER SURPRISED TO FIND THIS IN COLLEGE LONELY WATCHING NETFLIX) Yes, we have physical and emotional needs. And yes, romance and sex are one way we can fill those, but not the only ways. Let me explain.

One way to think about our needs for connection is to imagine a set of buckets that need to be filled with water. Each of the buckets represent a kind of intimacy we need. God made us mind, body, and spirit, so we need connection on an emotional level, intellectual level, physical level, and spiritual level.



Groundwork





[Notes]
When I say emotional intimacy, I mean having conversations that help you connect with gladness or fear or anger or sadness inside of you, and where you notice some of those same things in others. When I say spiritual intimacy, I mean connecting in a way that makes you feel more connected to God, by talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, or worshipping together. When I say physical intimacy, I mean a hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, and yes, kissing and cuddling and sex. When I say intellectual intimacy, I mean exchanging and exploring ideas with another person.

Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.” Now some would argue that there is a fifth bucket labeled “sexual.” That we all need sexual intimacy to be whole, and if we don’t get it, we will feel empty.

But I know plenty of people who have never had sex and who are full adults. They share with me that they have vibrant social lives, rich intimacy, and a satisfying experience of community. That’s been true in my own life. The healthy emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual intimacy I have experienced in friendships has been much more satisfying than the broken physical intimacy I have experienced in the past.

Plus, the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or marriage to be whole people. Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Paul was committed to celibacy. Many of the mothers and fathers of the Church have been celibate. And Jesus says that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex.



Groundwork



5. None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime.

6. If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.


[Notes]
None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime. Isaiah 59:2 says that our sins, our imperfection, our unwise choices have separated us from God and each other. Because this world is broken and we are broken, we can only ever connect with God and each other imperfectly. There’s this distance because of brokenness that we can never cross. Some amount of loneliness is a part of life. It is unavoidable.

THIS IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE A LOT OF PEOPLE GET DIVORCED AND GET MARRIED BECAUSE THEY DON’T UNDERSTAND
 
So should we just give up and stop trying to connect in healthy ways? No! For starters, even if we can’t meet all of our needs fully and finally, we can still get a lot of what we need. We can still enjoy rich, satisfying intimacy with God and other people in this life. And second, if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.

Okay, now that we’ve laid that groundwork, let’s talk about vocational singleness






Which of these statements is most challenging? Why?

We don’t need romance, sex, or marriage, and that is good news.

We have emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual intimacy needs.

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime.

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.




Share



Why Follow?




If a god exists, he’s the God of the Bible, and that God knows what is best for us—we’d be fools not to follow God’s wisdom

God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life

[Notes]
Why follow God’s wisdom?
Why follow God’s wisdom about intimacy and family? God seems to have a lot of rules for how we should seek out intimacy and family. Living your life according to that wisdom seems inconvenient. Why follow God’s wisdom?

If we believe that a god exists, if we believe that god is the God of the Bible, and if we believe that God knows what is best for us—if we really believe all of those things, we would be fools not to follow God’s wisdom.
If Lebron James was your basketball coach and you ignored his advice about how to become a better basketball player, you’d be a fool!
How much better advice does God have about the ways to enjoy the most goodness and beauty and meaning in this life? Trust Him!

We have been designed, by God, for specific purposes. That matters. We shouldn’t be surprised that when we allow ourselves to live in ways we weren’t designed to, we get hurt. We shouldn’t be surprised that when we use romance, marriage, and sex contrary to God’s design, it brings pain to our lives.

If God’s wisdom is best for us, following His teachings will save us from unnecessary pain of figuring out the best paths through trial and error. Plus, God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life.




What about the gays?



If the Church did this well, it would be a place where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage (MOM).

Their callings would be just as beautiful, and the challenges would be no greater.

[Notes]
what does that mean for gay people
why does God’s narrative for sexual stewardship matter to us?

if the Church did this well
It would be a place where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex (just like straight people!)
calling just a beautiful and challenges no greater

God’s narrative says that for every person, the most good will be found in a period of temporary singleness, vocational singleness, or marriage with someone of the opposite sex done correctly

We’ve got to become churches where vocational singleness taught and valued and just as good
other straight people walking out vocational singleness and thriving
church that recognizes brokenness and talks about brokenness of sexuality
also recognizes what marriage really is
so can thrive in MOM

everyone enjoys meaningful community in the Body of Christ



Share
What about this narrative is challenging? How does it contrast with the narrative of sexual fulfillment offered by culture and many churches?

How is this narrative good and beautiful and compelling for LGBT+ people?



50



THE PROBLEM


[Notes]
but that assumes that the Church is doing this well
news story: We AREN'T
where are our areas of growth?
we can’t get better until we admit we have a problem and we identify them




The Problem(s)



God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is about companionship and mutual fulfillment.
We only have to have kids if and when we want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

[Notes]
So, what does the Church really believe today?



The Problem(s)



The Church isn’t doing this well:
Straight Christians aren’t upholding the sanctity of marriage
There is no support for vocational singleness
We live disconnected, isolated lives

[Notes]
What are the results of having those beliefs?

we don’t refrain from emotional and physically intimate relationships before marriage
we assume we will be married, that marriage will satisfy, and that marriage is about making you happy
we no longer honor “through thick and thin” or see raising children as central
straight Christians aren’t upholding the sanctity of marriage

few consider vocational singleness as a calling
relegated to a curse of loneliness for the sake of the gospel
there is no support for vocational singleness because no straight people aren't doing it

don’t learn to do friendship well, have loose friendships
fear of close, same-sex friendships
don’t do life as a Body of Christ



The Problem(s)



This hurts Christians who experience same-sex attraction
Cannot thrive in vocational singleness or a MOM
We offer only Side A or Side X
Why should gay people be called to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?

[Notes]
these things hurt Christians who experience same-sex attraction
few churches are places where those who experience same-sex attraction can truly thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed orientation marriage (MOMs have been attacked for the past decade)
we offer Side A and Side X
we don’t offer an alternative that recognizes the challenges and answers questions people have
if we do not do this, we cannot blame unmarried people for reaching out for forbidden things from a place of loneliness
if straight people aren’t taking marriage seriously or considering vocational singleness, why should gay people call themselves to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?
the solution starts with straight married people stewarding their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic
If straight people really believed these things and lived them out, there would be support for vocational singleness and MOMs



The Problem(s)



This hurts straight Christians, too
Children grow up hearing all people will be straight, married, and have kids
Failed marriages due to refusing a call to vocational singleness and inaccurate expectations
Vocational singles struggle with loneliness and married people raise children alone

[Notes]
important for straight people
children are hearing that all people will be straight, married, with kids
but for many than won’t be the case
many failed marriages due to refusing a call to vocational singleness
and not accurately seeing marriage as a vocation that is lifelong and difficult
marriages would endure if we communicated more accurate expectations
Celibates struggle with loneliness and married people raise children alone
those called to vocational singleness need to see vocational singleness valued/celebrated and thriving modeled
and married people need help with kids from healthy celibates



The Problem(s)



Many people and circumstances on the margins:
Divorce
Widowing
Infertility
Pornography
Masturbation
Fornication
Adultery
Abortion
Contraception
Same-sex attraction
Broken gender

[Notes]
And same-sex attraction is just one of the ways that God’s perfect intentions for human intimacy is bent
there are lots of people and circumstances on the margins
there are lots of ways that the way we do intimacy is broken

divorce
widowing
infertility
pornography (lust, objectification, selfish, commodification)
masturbation
sex outside of marriage
adultery
abortion
contraception
same-sex attraction
broken gender

Some but not all of these are due to individual sin
But these are all communal sins that require a communal responses

So talking theologically about how God has invited us to steward our sexualities doesn’t just help us to answer the question of same-sex marriage
It can also help us respond to each of these areas of brokenness




Share
How have you seen these shortcomings in your community?

How have they impacted Christians in your community—both gay and straight?



74
