


What is
vocational singleness?



Sexual Stewardship



All first born into to a period of temporary singleness and discernment
Some called to vocational singleness
Others called to Christian marriage

[Notes]
What is Vocational Singleness?
The denominations that represent a majority of Christians today and throughout time have consistently understood Scripture to teach the following about our relational vocations: All Christians are first born into a period of temporary singleness during which they deepen in their relationships with God and others AND discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or Christian marriage. 



Sexual Stewardship




[Notes]
Here’s a representation of those same idea in a diagram



Intimacy & Family



Christian vocation - a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation? Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
Everyone should discern vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
today we’re focusing on vocational singleness, so let’s break that down

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
It’s a calling. God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness. And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference
but Why?







Everyone should discern vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Why? Because God has a preference
Where? Matt 19 + 1 Cor 7
A vocation should not be forced
Discernment

[Notes]
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

Now, you might point out that in verse 12 Jesus says that some “choose” the vocation of singleness.
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?
Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.
Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.






Everyone should discern vocational singleness and Christian marriage
A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.
Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness. 
Discernment

[Notes]
now a single person might push back
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural
Therefore, I don’t need to discern

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And more practically, we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

Scripture speaks of a gift, a provision of grace to do each of those well.
Scripture does not teach—and the Church has not taught—that God provides this same kind of special gift for those in temporary singleness.
Christians have historically understood these gifts of marriage and vocational singleness to involve both a willingness to accept the call and a provision to thrive in the call.

A common interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:9 is that poor sexual stewardship in singleness shows that one has not been given the gift of singleness and should instead marry.
Now, it’s more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.

As mentioned earlier, none of us inherently have what we need to do marriage or celibacy well. We will not receive the portion of grace to do either of those vocations until we accept the call and step into the vocation as God designed it.






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
Everyone should discern vocational singleness and Christian marriage
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
But it’s not just a calling. It’s a lifetime calling.
God intends for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent. We cannot imagine Jesus providing the 100-fold blessing promised in Luke 18:28-30 to someone who has only temporarily given up the prospect of marriage and children, only to later get married. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness than get married. Then in 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul reaffirms that a commitment to vocational singleness is good and to break that commitment is a sin.

At this point, people often pull on my arm and ask “why make this distinction between temporary singleness and vocational singleness?”






Temporary Singleness
Temporary vs. Vocational Singleness
Waiting for marriage vs. permanently giving up romance + marriage + sex + children for the kingdom
Temporary singles often shallowly invested in community and kingdom work
Jesus and Paul commend vocational singleness
Must step into vocational singleness to receive the gift

[Notes]
Well, we’re all born into temporary singleness. That’s our default state. But there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

Additionally, those who continue indefinitely in temporary singleness are likely to be shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and uncommitted to the kingdom work they’re doing because they have to stay prepared to reorganize their lives around a (potential) spouse at any moment.
Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness--they’re commending vocational singleness.
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.

That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness. For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage in their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life. While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.   







“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, sex, and children, but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children. And then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship.
But, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family. In Isaiah 56:3-5, the celibate is promised family, belonging, and honor equal to the married person, that they will be full and equal members of the family of God, that they will be spiritual parents in ways just as great as biological parents. In Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:36-38, Paul recognizes that those called to celibacy still need committed companionship by commending the now-outlawed spiritual betrothals present in the early Church. Then in 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul recognizes early families of celibate people by commending a committed community of celibate women.
Now that we know what vocational singleness is, now let’s explore why God calls some people to this lifetime vocation of singleness.






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth 
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now that we know what vocational singleness is, now let’s explore why God calls some people to this lifetime vocation of singleness.
 
why? for the sake of the kingdom

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness. Those called to vocational singleness live “for the sake of the kingdom” in three ways:

First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time, energy, or financial freedom to do. In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus invites his disciples to consider giving up the potential for spouse and children in order to live “like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom,” referring to Old Testament eunuchs who commonly worked for a king, managing and building up the king’s kingdom. In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church. In 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul commends faithful members of the community of celibate women who have fully committed themselves to the Lord.
 
Second, Vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel. Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love found in God’s family (the Trinity and between Christ and the Church), preaching the gospel by reflecting that love. The Church has historically taught that the love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church is diverse or complementary, intimate, faithful or lifelong, life-giving or procreative, sacrificial, and hospitable. Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness embodies each of those six characteristics. For the sake of time I won’t tease that out here, but I’ll include it in your notes…

Third, Vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth. In Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth. So vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE. 

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christians called to vocational singleness fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, more belonging, and more honor than married people, they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us. 
 
But today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family. Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection; and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.







Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

Vocational singleness is a lifetime call to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
It is supposed to be a vocation that is just as beautiful as marriage, both practically and theologically. Isaiah 56:3-5 promises those called to vocational singleness family, belonging, and honor equal to married people, that they will be full and equal members of the family of God, and that they will be spiritual parents in ways just as great as biological parents. In Matthew 19:1-12 Jesus suggests that the average Jew should now consider vocational singleness, lifting up vocational singleness from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian. In Luke 18:28-30 Jesus promises an 100-fold blessing to those called to vocational singleness, suggesting it is equal, if not greater. And in 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul shows a preference for vocational singleness and describes it as practically superior.







5 Ingredients for Wise Discernment
Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
Discernment

[Notes]
we’ve talked about what vocational singleness is
now, what should you do about it?
Give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness
Discern whether God is calling you to Christian marriage or vocational singleness
open-handedly offer this question to God
set your preference aside and ask Him for His preference
 
I could spend a whole hour talking just about discernment
I’ve actually written a book about discerning this question and am currently in conversation with publishers
so if you want longer-form conversation or want to read the book, hit me up
but here’s five good ingredients for discernment
five things to do that will set you up to receive from God His wisdom 

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.






What is
vocational singleness?

[Notes]
So I beg you, straight Christians, please discern, for your own sake! It will make marriage better for those of you called to it and vocational singleness better for those of you called to it. But even if you’re not motivated by your own need to discern this question, what if you did it for the gays? If not for your own sake, discern for the sake of gay people like me, so that a small but mighty number of straight Christians join gay Christians in the ranks of celibate Christians. Add your voice to our cries for better teaching and support from the Church.
 
You can be a big part of helping build a church where people like me can thrive
and in the process, you’ll step down the path God is most eager to bless and you’ll experience the most beauty God has for you.







Diverse – differentness of personalities, sexes, ages
Intimate – still a call to family, fullness of God’s love in NHNE
Faithful – permanent and lifetime, consistent kingdom work
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now, let’s look at the ways singleness for the sake of the kingdom embodies those six characteristics of love found in the Trinity and between Christ and His Church.


1. Vocational singleness is diverse. The friendships enjoyed by those committed to vocational singleness reflect the diversity in God’s family. There is a differentness between the persons in each friendship. Plus, vocational singles still need healthy relationships with people of the opposite sex, parents, and children. Vocational singleness is still a call to a diversity of friendships with people of all ages and stages of life. This differentness points observers back to the complementarity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church as well as the unity found in the body of Christ even amidst differences.

2. Vocational singleness is intimate. As already mentioned, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of family. Jesus and Paul recognize vocational singles’ need for committed companionship and promise a 100-fold of family in this lifetime (reference). This intimacy points observers back to the intimacy in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. The family vocational singles enjoy testifies to the fullness of God’s love and gives every Christian hope for how we will all live in the New Heavens and New Earth.

3. Vocational singleness is faithful. The permanent, lifetime nature of a commitment to vocational singleness reflects the faithfulness of God’s love found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. Through this vocation, those called faithfully live out their singleness for the Lord consistently build up the kingdom in ways that point back to the faithfulness of the love in God’s family.







Life-giving – spiritually procreative and more kingdom work
Sacrificial – give up idol of romance to follow Jesus
Hospitable – offer family to lonely
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
4. Vocational singleness is life-giving. While those called to vocational singleness do not bear biological children, their availability for kingdom works should bear the fruit of many times more spiritual children. The vocationally single have the time and energy to share the gospel with more not-yet-believers and mentor more new Christians than parents can. Plus, those called to vocational singleness reflect the procreative nature of God’s love by building up the kingdom and bringing spiritual life to the Church.

5. Vocational singleness is sacrificial. At first glance, those called to vocational singleness have chosen to give up their right to some of our culture’s most coveted experiences: romance, dating, marriage, and sex. The sacrifice of vocational singles points observers back to the sacrificial nature of the love in God’s family.

6. Vocational singleness is hospitable. Those called to vocational singleness have the unique opportunity to offer family to those on the margins without the need to compete for belonging. This hospitality reflects the welcoming nature of the love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.
