God’s Love& Wisdom for LGBT+ People

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
PIETER
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a historic sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University,
studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

When I use the word gay to describe myself or others,
I’m merely using that word to refer to the fact that
people experience same-sex attraction, nothing more.
I’m not using it to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or relationship status, either one way or another.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what we mean when we use the words we do today.
my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic

In terms of my personal life
while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.

but I knew I didn’t a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
So I asked my pastor at the time, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus six of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.

I’ve actually made lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to this family,
and I know who some of the guys are who will see my ugliest parts but won’t run away,
who I’ll grow old with,
and who will hold my hand when the people we love pass.
God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
so today, we’re going to explore what God’s love and wisdom is for LGBT+ people
this morning we’ll focus on God’s love and wisdom for gay people
I’ll share with a little bit about how I’ve made sense of being gay
and what I understand God’s wisdom to be for me
then we’ll cast a vision for what it could look like for your church to embody God’s love and wisdom for gay people
and discuss some common questions that come up in 1-on-1 discipleship

later this afternoon, we’ll focus on God’s love and wisdom for trans people
including how to lead with compassion, particularly in light of high suicide risk among trans people
we’ll explore God’s wisdom for trans people
and we’ll discuss some practical tools for pastoral care with trans people

ohh, and feel free to take notes, but there will be an opportunity later for you to share your email address with me if you’d like for me to email you full notes
what do I believe?

[Notes]
so first, how can we make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion?

I want to model that by sharing with you what I understand to be God’s wisdom for my life
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons

To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch

For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions

For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a historic sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different.

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall

That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin

So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems

Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways
that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity

What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible

Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions
or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture,
but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions:
no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out

How does that apply to broken sexuality?
I believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God
and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a revisionist sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction
Share
What did you find helpful about this articulation of God’s wisdom? Challenging?
How is this different than ways you’ve shared about God’s wisdom in the past?
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
PIETER

In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a lifetime committed singleness
where one gives up romance and marriage and sex
to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out

And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage
as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman
for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question,
“What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear:
vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
unfortunately, most of my gay Christian friends who have abandoned historic sexual ethics
for an ethic that condoned gay sex eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them have followed a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

So yeah, I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that historic sexual ethics is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, the gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a historic sexual ethic, too
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic are lonely,
struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon historic Christian sexual ethics because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic




God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
so how?

the solution

[Notes]
how can our churches becomes places where gay Christians thrive according to God’s wisdom?
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support
And look the other way when straight Christians
casually engage in romance
have sex outside of marriage
Suffer from near-ubiquitous pornography addiction
unthinkingly refuse an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage
and engage in unbiblical divorce/remarriage
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people
can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort

Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics,
but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.

They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.

But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.

Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.
Share
How might people at your church respond to this nuanced presentation of God’s wisdom for gay people? What would they find compelling? Lacking?
God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
so we’ve explored how we can think compassionately about sexual ethics
and cast a vision for thriving in our churches
I want to wrap up this morning by addressing some of the toughest questions that come up in discipleship
the big questions

[Notes]
I want to be clear: We’re not offering responses to these questions so you can go find the gay people in your community and tell them the answers,
But I’m pretty confident that none of y’all would actually do that…
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when gay people raise them.
Or, you might even have a gay person in your community asking you to lead them in making sense of their faith and sexuality.
In that case, you can create space for these questions, listen well, and help the gay people in your community think well about them.
Pastoral Care Question 1
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
here’s a first set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 1
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 1
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 1
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 2
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our second set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 2
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
As I’ve already shard, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a revisionist sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 2
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 3
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
here’s our third set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 3
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 3
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 3
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 3
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 3
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Should I call myself gay? How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Practice term-mirroring as hospitality. Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior. Create space for Christians to use the word “gay”.

[Notes]
here’s our fourth set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:
Should I call myself gay?
How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Particularly in conversation with LGBT+ non-Christians or when first meeting LGBT+ Christians,choose to mirror their terminology as an act of hospitality.
Instead of letting language be an early barrier to conversation, ask them what words they use to describe themselves,
ask what those words mean to them, and then choose to use those words with those definitions in conversation.
This doesn’t mean you’re affirming their use of that word or that definition.
Rather, you’re choosing to defer to them in that space so that you can focus on much more important topics.

Conflation of attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior is often a source of disagreement about language.
Instead, distinguish between the four different aspects of sexuality, like we discussed earlier

Next, create space for students to use the word “gay.”
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage.
There is no perfect term for ministering to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay young adults in your ministry, and straight culture warriors among your donors and alumni.
I choose the word most effective with gay teens and young adults and then make clear what I mean.

I think it’s important to distinguish between using the word “gay” phenomenologically versus ontologically.
I am using “gay” phenomenologically, not ontologically.
When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based one one’s experience or what it appears to be.
In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design.
When I use the word “gay,” I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay.
I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay.
I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same sex, and using the word “gay” is, in my opinion, the best word to describe that experience.

Finally, when I use the word “gay,'“ I am ultimately taking advantage of an opportunity to share the gospel.
I say, “I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
With this, I communicate that I am a child of God, first and foremost.
Jesus, and Jesus alone, sits on the throne of my life.
And I experience same-sex attraction.
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world.
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences.
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences.
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences.
I use the word “gay” to identify with people, not to identify with sin.
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first. Don’t expect gay Christians to follow God’s wisdom until you’ve made thriving accessible.
Pastoral Care Question 5

[Notes]
and here’s our last tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse. Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.
They can’t begin to accept the historic Christian sexual ethic until they’ve accepted Jesus as savior, king, and lord.

If the LGBT+ person is a Christian but isn’t convinced of a historic sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned them to loneliness if committed to celibacy.


Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?
Pastoral Care Question 5

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Being a winsome witness
Recognize the sins of the Church
Offer clarity as a form of charity
Publicly commit to doing better
Cultivate thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
Call straight people to sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.

[Notes]
In the meantime, what can we do?
How can we offer a winsome witness on these topics in progressive environments?

First, recognize the sins of Christians in the past.
In particular, pray the gay away solutions, double standards for sexual ethics, paltry support of celibacy, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate.
Don’t be afraid to apologize. Not for holding a historic sexual ethic, but for the ways Christians over the past century have sinned against gay people.

Second, offer clarity as a form of charity.
Be clear about what you understand God’s wisdom to be for sexual stewardship. Share your understanding in a humble way.

Third, publicly commit to doing better and taking practical steps.
Be explicit. Tell them what your church is going to do differently. And then do it!

In particular (fourth), I’d encourage you to take the steps necessary to support gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
in ways that actually bear undeniably good fruit. Realize that vision for a thriving community that we explored earlier.

And fifth, call straight people to a high standard of sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.
When we hold straight people to a lower standard of sexual stewardship than gay people, we lose credibility and hurt straight people.
And vocational singleness won’t be viable for gay people until a meaningful minority of straight people are accepting God’s call to commit to a lifetime of singleness for the sake of God’s kingdom.

So keep meeting with those who doubt God’s love or the wisdom of a historic Christian sexual ethic.
And outside of those conversations, get busy pushing your community to become a place where gay Christians could actually thrive according to God's wisdom.

Share
Which questions would be most challenging to explore with a gay person? Why?
To get full notes from today

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
now let’s pivot and focus on God’s love and wisdom for trans people
terms/concepts

[Notes]
first, I want to make sure we’re all on the same page with some of the terms and concepts I’m going to use

Concepts/Terminology
Biological Sex—physical body; being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—internal sense of being a woman or a man; influenced by cultural gender roles/expectations; named/labeled internally and externally as gender identity

[Notes]
When I use the word biological sex, I’m referring to a person’s physical body. Chromosomes, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics indicate whether a person is biologically male or biologically female.

When I use the word gender, I’m referring to a person’s internal sense of being a man or a woman. This is impacted by stereotypes and expectations from the world around us. Additionally, a person may privately and/or publicly label their gender, and that’s what’s called a person’s gender identity.


Concepts/Terminology
Femininity/Masculinity – a person’s sense of being a woman/man and cultural expectations for how women/men will express their gender

[Notes]
When I use the word femininity or masculinity, I’m referring to a person’s sense of being a woman/man and cultural expectations for how women/men will express their gender




Concepts/Terminology
Sex: female or male, physical body
Gender: woman (feminine) or man (masculine)

Gender Incongruence – acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex

Transgender/Trans – a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence

[Notes]
So, a person’s biological sex is either male or female, and that’s based on their physical body.
And a person’s gender is either a man or a woman, and that’s based on whether they feel feminine or masculine internally.
A female typically feels like a woman, feels sufficiently feminine on the inside. And a male typically feels like a man, feels sufficiently masculine on the inside.

But what happens when a person doesn’t feel like their biological sex and internal sense of gender line up?
That’s what we’ll call gender incongruence.

And then some people use the word transgender or trans to describe a person who experiences gender incongruence. Kind of like how we use the word gay or lesbian to describe a person who experiences same-sex attraction.

We’ll talk a whole lot more about pronouns and names and labels later, but my initial advice is practice term mirroring as an act of hospitality.
Particularly if you’re first interacting with someone.
Or the other person isn’t a Christian.
Choose to notice the words they’re using and how they’re using them.
And then mirror those words and definitions as an act of hospitality.
You’re not affirming that they’re using the right words and definitions.
You’re just preventing arguments about terms and labels from being a barrier to building relationship.
preventing suicide

[Notes]
Okay, so now that we’ve synced on some shared terminology for this conversation,
I want to recognize a painful but important reality when it comes to caring for trans people.

Different estimates put the number of trans people at anywhere from .5% to 5% of the population
And experience among trans people are varied

For example, trans people may be straight, gay, bisexual, asexual, or something in between polysexual, pansexual, etc.
According to a survey conducted by the National LGBTQ Task force and the National Center for Transgender Equality,
about 3/4 of trans people are attracted to people of the same biological sex

When you’ve met one trans person, you’ve met one trans person

But one aspect that’s painfully common is depression and suicidality

41% of trans people attempt suicide (1.6% in gen pop)

Even higher rates for those who…
lost a job due to bias (55%),
were harassed/bullied in school (51%)
had low household income (61%),
were the victim of physical assault (61%), or
were the victim of sexual assault (65%)
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population.
Trans suicide rates rose even higher for those who
lost a job due to bias (55%),
were harassed/bullied in school (51%),
had low household income (61%),
were the victim of physical assault (61%), or
were the victim of sexual assault (65%).


Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of (compared to the general population): 
borderline personality disorder
schizophrenia 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
autism spectrum disorder
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of
borderline personality disorder,
schizophrenia,
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD),
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
and autism spectrum disorder
compared to the general population.

Trans people were made in the image of God. He highly values them. Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their lives aren’t worth living.

Neither “Just be normal” nor “Transition or suicide” fully reflects God’s love and wisdom.
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

We can see from these statistics that more than any other people group,
trans people experience an excess of mental health and suicide concerns.

Trans people are made in the image of God and God highly values them.
Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their precious life isn't worth living.
This piece of the trans* experience can often be ignored
or used as the explanation behind why an individual is experiencing gender incongruence.

Neither provides holistic care for the individual.
Different extremes in the debate about gender incongruence offer trans* people equally unhelpful advice:
One side yells, “Just be normal!”
They ignore the reality that trans* people did not choose to experience gender incongruence and that there is no proven combination of counseling or spiritual practices to eliminate gender incongruence. Those on this extreme minimize the daily, painful reality of navigating enduring gender incongruence. They seem to forget that trans* people are also made in the image of God, are greatly valued by Him, and that Christians should greatly value trans* people as well.
Then the other side yells, “Transition or suicide!”
They suggest that transition is an effective intervention to address mental illness (including suicidality) and that those who hesitate to bless hormonal and surgical transition are increasing suicidality.
Neither of those reflects God’s love and wisdom.


Available research does not demonstrate that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk.
So if transition isn’t the solution to trans suicide, what is?
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
What about this ”transition or suicide” mantra?
Is that true, scientifically?
Well, long story short, no.
Available research doesn’t show that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduces suicide risk. 
Some scientific research demonstrated that using gender-affirming hormones or puberty blockers was associated with a lower risk of suicidal ideation. Yet different analysis of the same data found that males going through hormonal transition were more likely to plan suicide, to attempt suicide, and to require hospitalization for a suicide attempt.

Similar analysis found that 16- and 17-year-olds who received cross-sex hormones were more than twice as likely to report a past-year suicide attempt requiring inpatient hospitalization. I’ll make sure to include the references to all of this in followup notes we’ll add to the staff resource folder.
A similar story emerges for surgical transition.
Scientific studies have consistently found that surgical transition effectively reduces gender dysphoria and leads to high patient satisfaction, but they fail to reduce depression and suicidality. A longitudinal study of surgical transition in Denmark found that while 21.2% of participants experienced a reduction in suicidality after transition, 15.4% of participants experienced an increase in suicidality after transition.
Available research does not demonstrate that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk.

Yall might have seen the news earlier this week that the largest review ever undertaken in the field of transgender health was released. It was led by Dr. Hilary Cass, a former president of the UK’s Royal College of Paediatrics, and it was commissioned by Britain’s National Health Service (NHS). It confirmed that
80% of gender incongruence resolves by adulthood
Puberty blockers are usually a gateway to cross-sex hormone therapy
Puberty blockers + hormone therapy aren't effective treatment for depression/suicidality and may be harmful
Talk therapy around co-occurring mental health concerns most effective treatment for depression/suicidality
Trans identification growth isn't explained by greater social acceptance and correlated factors include females, social media use, and friendship with other trans females

We’ll unpack more of that later, but it suffices to say that transition isn’t the solution to trans suicide.

So if it isn’t, what is?


The best practices for caring for depression and suicidality are universal:
In-person talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Use of antidepressants
A broader community of social support
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

The best way to reduce depression and suicidality for a trans person
is to employ the best practice for reducing depression and suicidality among anyone:
1. In-person talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
2. Regular exercise/physical activity
3. Use of antidepressants
4. A broader community of social support
If a trans person you’re supporting is struggling with suicidality, help them find a therapist or counselor, go with them on walks, and help them maintain and deepen connections with safe friends and family.
Okay, so we’ve built out a foundational understanding of terminology and concepts for this conversation
And we’ve recognized the high rates of depression and suicidality among trans people and how we must lead with compassionate care

Share
How often have you heard “transition or suicide”? To what extent are you comfortable connecting trans people with proven interventions to address depression/suicidality?
God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
Next, let’s explore gender ethics and what Christ’s love and wisdom is for trans people.

secular & progressive faith responses

[Notes]
before we get into that, I want to consider the secular solutions and progressive Christian solutions out there
and why those might be inadequate

Secular, Binary-Affirming
Affirm gender/sex binary
Believe they were meant to be born into a body that matches their gender
Seek to preserve/strengthen cultural distinctions/stereotypes between men and women

[Notes]
Secular worldviews on gender identity questions are diverse but can be distilled into two, seemingly contradictory, camps.
First, many affirm the existence of a gender binary but merely believe that their physical body does not match the gender of their mind, soul, or spirit.

Advocates for this perspective, such as Caitlyn Jenner, want to preserve the distinction between men and women while allowing people to conform their bodies to their gender.
Some note that this response to gender incongruence actually deepens gender stereotypes and increases distress for those who do not feel like transition is the right step for them.

Secular, Deconstructionist
Reject gender/sex binary
Seek to deconstruct both gender and sex as arbitrary labels/constructs to be discarded
This perspective is accused of silencing or invalidating those who have transitioned 

[Notes]
The second perspective rejects the gender binary altogether.

Often younger transgender people, advocates for this perspective want to deconstruct any male/female or man/woman distinction,
seeing them as arbitrary labels that ignore the wide range of genders and biological sexes along a spectrum.

As the editors of Understanding Transgender Identities: Four Views explain,
“an increasingly common area of criticism leveled against queer theory [is] that it frequently disregards the lived experiences of the very people it appeals to in its theoretical arguments.
More specifically, from early on queer theorists tended to cast a skeptical eye on the transsexual sector of the transgender community.
The reason for this is simple.”

the editors continue, “The reported experience of many transsexuals is that their true self, which they often describe in terms of an innate and unchanging gender identity,
is trapped in the ‘wrong body’ (i.e. the wrong biological sex).
But this sort of claim appears to depend on something like a fixed, essentialist identity and the male/female sex binary, which runs afoul of the central convictions of queer theory.
This explains why many trans activists who embrace queer theory have often expressed attitudes toward SRS (Sexual Reassignment Surgery) ranging from ambivalence to outright disdain...."

Contradicting Secular Ideas
One seeks to strengthen the gender/sex binary, while the other seeks to eliminate it.

[Notes]
Ultimately, the “solutions to the problem” that each perspective advocates for are contradictory and compete against each other.
One seeks to maintain the gender/sex binary while the other seeks to deconstruct it.
This complicates a Christian’s response to secular worldviews regarding gender incongruence because secular progressives offer multiple, opposing explanations.




Progressive Christian Views
Some no longer see the Bible as authoritative, freeing Christians to follow secular ethics
Others interpret Christ’s words about eunuchs and the lack of marriage/sex in heaven as blessing medical transition

[Notes]
Then some progressive Christians embrace secular philosophies toward gender incongruence.

Some simply claim that the Bible isn’t binding or authoritative for modern Christians,
so Christians can choose to follow whatever gender ethic they feel is most fair and true.

Other progressive Christians argue that the mention and embrace of eunuchs in the New Testament signals that genital alteration has been made holy by Jesus,
in addition to claims that there will be no gender or biological sex in heaven (therefore whatever a person feels is most authentic should be accommodated).

How can Christians who hold a historic gender ethic response?
Recognize the brokenness of cultural gender prescriptions
Honor the pain of those navigating gender incongruence
Affirm God’s good design of the sex/gender binary
Become churches where trans* Christian can thrive according to God’s wisdom

[Notes]
Christians who continue to hold a historic sexual ethic can respond by recognizing that cultural gender prescriptions are, indeed, broken,
and we believe that our gender ethic should be informed by how Christians have consistently understood the Scriptures.

As we’ll explain more in a second,
Christians have historically understood the Scriptures to teach that God intended for each of us to be either male-bodied men and female-bodied women.

That differences between gender expression should not be eliminated, and that altering one’s genitals is a sin.

Yet some people, by no choice of their own, but instead as a product of the Fall, experience gender incongruence.
Their experience of their gender is painfully broken.

Instead of reinforcing gender stereotypes or eliminating gender and sex altogether,
we should resist the urge to over-prescribe cultural gender,
and we should affirm God’s good design of the sex/gender binary,
all by drawing close to those navigating gender incongruence,
and becoming churches where trans Christians can thrive according to historic gender ethics.

share
How do the “two camps” of secular worldviews on this topic make a Christian response difficult?

What might it look like for Christians to resist cultural gender stereotypes while affirming the gender/sex binary?

[Notes]
Take some time to review your notes, and then reflect individually or with others on the following questions:
1. How do the “two camps” of secular worldviews on this topic make a Christian response difficult?
2. What might it look like for Christians to resist cultural gender stereotypes while affirming the gender/sex binary?


God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
So if secular and progressive Christian “solutions” aren’t ultimately how God wants to lead Christians to think about gender ethics and make sense of gender incongruence,
then how does God want to lead us?
How does God want us to offer the love and wisdom of Jesus to trans people.
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
The Bible contains everything necessary and sufficient for salvation.

Almost nothing directly about gender incongruence, but some meaningful passages about biological sex and gender expression.

[Notes]
PIETER

While the Bible promises to contain everything necessary and sufficient for salvation, God did not intend for the Bible to provide Christians with the answers to every question they might have about the Christian’s life.
There are several passages that address biological sex and gender expression that can serve as building blocks for a faithful response to gender incongruence,
but the Bible doesn’t say anything directly about gender incongruence.
That doesn’t mean God doesn’t have wisdom for trans people. Or that it’s up to each of us to make up our own mind.

God has wisdom for us, He wants us to seek His wisdom, He’s not of two minds on this, and He has given us enough building blocks in Scripture to make sense of this.
Now, if we had time, we’d walk through 10 different passages of Scripture and dissect what each of those might offer us. But we don’t have time for that today. If you’re interested, we can provide you with our full notes on that. 

Instead, we’ll tease out Genesis 1-3 a bit, list the others, and fast-forward to some topline take-away’s.
Genesis 1-3
God intended for us to bear His image, including through sexual difference.

The author of Genesis likely meant to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.

[Notes]
KAT

So first, Genesis 1-3 narrates creation, including that of Adam and Eve. Importantly, God creates humans male and female, in His image. Biological sex difference between Adam and Eve was only one of the ways they reflected the diverse complexity of the Trinity and of Christ’s relationship with the Church.
Our bodies (including our given biological sex) are essential to bearing God’s image, suggesting there is a sacred integrity to maleness and femaleness. 
Interestingly, the Hebrew words for male and female are the same words used to describe the paired animals included in the ark to repopulate the world after the flood. 
Suggesting that central to God’s design for humans was their corresponding reproductive capacities given by their biological sex. As image-bearers, God created us each with a unique body that represents His craftsmanship and care that he puts into our physical being.
It is important to note that while common translations use the words “male and female”, the original text did not assume a duality between sex and gender or intend to narrowly communicate about biological sex. We can assume that the authors of Scripture meant these words to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.
Accordingly, you might read Genesis 1:27 in the following way:
“So God created mankind in his own image, in the image of God he created them; male man and female woman he created them.”
The Bible & Gender Ethics
Deuteronomy 22:5
Deuteronomy 23:1
Isaiah 56:1-5
Matthew 19:3-12
Matthew 22:30
Additional passages:
Acts 8:25-39
1 Corinthians 6:12-20
1 Corinthians 11:2-16
Galatians 3:27-28

[Notes]
KAT

Here’s a list of the other passages that our full notes will explore
Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?
Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) cross-dressed and gave himself in marriage as a wife
Cult practices to Ishtar included cross-dressing; similar in Phrygia w/ castration (300 BC)
Ovid (43 BC to 18 AD) wrote about gods granting Iphis a wish to be transformed from girl to boy

[Notes]
KAT

I think it’s worth addressing this question more fully: Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?

Interestingly, they were aware of individuals who were biologically one sex but presented as someone of the opposite sex, and they were aware of individuals whose sexual anatomy had been surgically altered.
The Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) dressed as a woman when trying to entice men, worked in brothels as a woman, and dressed as a bride and gave himself away as a wife when he married a male slave.
Ancient Mesopotomaian cult practices (6000 BC to 400 AD) included biological men whose “appearance either was feminine or had both male and female characteristics,” corresponding to a deity named Ishtar who was known for blurring gender expression.
Similar cult practices were seen in Phrygia where men were castrated, dressed as women, and played feminine roles in society (300 BC).

Just before the events of the New Testament, Ovid (43 BC to AD 18) wrote about a biological girl named Iphis whose mother raised her as a boy. Iphis finds herself attracted to women, asks the gods to transform her into a male, and her wish is granted.
In summary, the Bible…

Forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, & the elimination of gender difference
Affirms the sex and gender binary
Makes clear that genital mutilation doesn’t prevent people from being able to image God + be part of His family
Affirms dozens of times when men & women break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes

[Notes]
PIETER

So, if we were able to dive deeply into each of those passages, here’s a summary of what we’d glean:
The Bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, and the elimination of gender difference.
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
But the Bible also makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family.
And the Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.
Throughout the Bible, men are called to exemplify and reflect emotional states such as weeping in Psalm 51:10-11, tenderheartedness in Micah 6:8, and sensitivity to those around them, keeping peace, and showing deep affection for others through their physical and emotional connections in I Samuel 18:1-3.
Women also break many stereotypes. Proverbs 31 pictures a cunning, entrepreneurial businesswoman who works hard to provide for her family, and both the Old and New Testaments contain examples such as Deborah, Lydia, Rahab, Ruth, Naomi, Junia, Priscilla, Joanna, Susana, and Mary, along with many other wealthy women that helped support Jesus’ ministry.
Jesus Himself broke stereotypes by daring to associate with “sinful women’’ in Luke 7:47,50, and He even revealed His deity for the first time to the Samaritan woman at the well who would have been seen as the lowest of the low.

Key questions

What were God’s intentions for bio sex and gender?
To what extent did God prescribe bio sex and gender?
How is gender broken, biologically and culturally?
How can we conceptualize broken gender?
What were God’s intention? Can it change?
Is merely experiencing it a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can they take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Using those building blocks, let’s then answer the following questions:
What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender?
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?
How is gender broken, biologically and culturally?
How can we conceptualize broken gender?
How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God’s intention? Can it change?
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 
There is diversity and corresponding differentness in the Trinity, and God created humans in His image to display and point us back to that diversity and correspondence.

One such source of diversity and correspondence (among many) is biological sex and gender.

[Notes]
PIETER

First, What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 

There is diversity and corresponding differentness in the Trinity, and God created humans in His image to display and point us back to that diversity and correspondence. One such source of diversity and correspondence (among many) is biological sex and gender.
But to say more than that, I lean on the work of theologians who are much smarter and studied than me who are deeply rooted in time-tested denominations. I’ve found the work of Karl Barth on this topic particularly helpful.

He was a Swiss Reformed theologian who lived from 1886 to 1968. He is often regarded as one of the greatest Protestant theologians of the 20th century. He heavily influenced Dietrich Bonhoeffer and supported the Confessing Church in Germany against the Nazis.

In his massive 6-million word systematic theology “Church Dogmatics”,
Barth explains that he both sees the Scriptures as absolutely authoritative
and has a great reverence for the Scriptures,
leading him to hesitate from overstating what we can glean from the Scriptures about God’s intentions for sexual difference. 
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our bio sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.

God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us. 

[Notes]
PIETER

He, among others, have consistently and narrowly defined faithfulness to our biological maleness or femaleness as:
Accepting our biological maleness or femaleness philosophically.That means recognizing in our mind (and later with our words and actions) that we are indeed biologically male or biologically female,
recognizing our potential for friendship and marriage as biologically sexed people and following God’s wisdom as we engage those capacities.
For Barth, this also highlights the narrow ways that a person can reject his or her biological sex:
By rejecting their biological maleness or femaleness outright. Rejection could be in our mind, through our words, or with our actions.
By engaging in sex outside of Christian marriage.
However, by Barth’s estimation, God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for males or females.

God didn’t communicate any further intentions about universal masculinity or femininity. He seems to have expected and even invited humans, with our authority and responsibility to care for and rule over Creation, to create beautiful cultures and to express our differences within those patterns of masculine and feminine expression.

As such, man-made gender prescriptions do not have moral weight and frequently change from generation to generation and culture to culture.

How is gender broken biologically and culturally?
Unfortunately, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders.

As such, most biblical examples of what it means to be male/female are imperfect.

[Notes]
KAT

Let’s move on to that third question: How is gender broken biologically and culturally?
Well, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. When God first imagined each of us, He created us to be perfect in every way, including our biological sex and gender. But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin. Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our biological sex and gender.
But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin. Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our biological sex and gender.
We should not be surprised, then, when we find that our bodies, minds, and spirits experience and express sex and gender in broken ways.
This highlights another reason why the Scriptures provide limited wisdom for universal maleness/femaleness and masculinity/femininity: 
When we search the Bible for prescriptions about perfect maleness and femaleness, we are only provided with:
perfect examples in the Garden of Eden before the Fall 
in prophecy about the New Heaven and the New Earth
and in Jesus.
It is difficult to prescribe what correct gender experience and expression is other than what Pieter just described by:
accepting one’s biological maleness or femaleness, 
following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship
refraining from rejecting biological maleness or femaleness.
So, if everything in this world is broken, then our cultural understanding of gender is also broken…
How is cultural gender broken?
When we’ve arbitrarily assigned preference to one gender or another, how much distress and confusion have we caused our children?

All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender. Resist opportunities to arbitrarily assign preferences.

[Notes]
KAT

Here’s the problem with our cultural definitions of gender: Is pink a girl color? Is blue a boy color?
100 years ago, pink was considered the more masculine color because of its resemblance to red, and blue was considered dainty. Throughout the early and mid 1900s children wore mostly gender-neutral clothing and there was no sense of a color being associated with one gender or another. 
But once science allowed parents to learn a child’s sex long before birth, retailers sought to increase sales by marketing higher-priced, gender-differentiated clothes, blankets, and toys so that parents would spend more money preparing a baby’s room, including separating these items by color.
Our society has attributed some colors to one gender or another despite color preferences being unrelated to gender. Yet the impact of arbitrary gender prescriptions like these can be much worse than inflated prices. What happens when we ascribe something to gender that has nothing to do with gender?
Say a boy prefers the color pink: pink toys, pink clothing, pink blankets. Parents often respond with a forced choice for the child: either reject your preference for pink and choose to be a boy, or continue to prefer pink and experience shame. 
How much distress and confusion is caused by ascribing gender to preferences that have nothing to do with gender at all? How much shame and rejection do these forced choices create in children? Could these feelings lead a child to question whether they’re really a boy or really a girl?
All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender. We would do well to resist opportunities to assign preferences to one gender or another. To be clear, we’re not trying to deconstruct gender. Instead, we hope to glean God’s intentions for gender so that the true nature of gender may be appreciated.
So God made us male or female.We’re called to honor God’s gift of our maleness and femaleness.Yet God chose not to define gender much further.Instead, He left humans to create beautiful cultures and to express our differentness in lots of ways, including through cultural patterns of gender expression.
But, the Fall has impacted everything, including our biological sexes, our genders, and our cultural definitions of gender.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
Concerned with what actions are sins
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
PIETER

Okay, fourth: How can Christians conceptualize or make sense of gender incongruence?

Well, Mark Yarhouse, a contemporary Christian psychologist has suggested that there are three lenses through which Christian can view and seek to understand gender incongruence:
the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.
The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of gender incongruence and how Christians respond. Generally, when the Christian uses the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask, “What actions are sins? What actions seem morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?”

If a Christian seeks to understand gender incongruence exclusively through the integrity lens, the Christian should primarily explore whether different steps of social, hormonal, and surgical transition are sins or not.

How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
Recognize enduring physical brokenness and call on the Church to care for trans people
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
PIETER

The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian
and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people.

When Christians view gender incongruence through the disability lens, they recognize that gender incongruence is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world, but those navigating gender incongruence do not choose to experience incongruence nor is there a reliable method for eliminating gender incongruence.

Christians seeking to understand gender incongruence through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches to care for trans people with God’s love and wisdom as those trans people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens
Celebrating unique testimonies, gifts, and strengths faithful trans Christians develop (and offer the Church) from submitting to God’s wisdom

[Notes]
PIETER

The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ. 

When Christians who hold a progressive gender ethic view gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they see the trans experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God.

However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand gender incongruence through the diversity lens,
they ask how Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ particularly from stewarding their brokenness
(while recognizing that God did not intend gender incongruence or for gender incongruence to image God).
As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand gender incongruence through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate. 

Like a kaleidoscope, the best way to appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence is to stack all three lenses on top of each other and seek to understand gender incongruence through them simultaneously.

There are simultaneously moral questions, an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence with the support they need to thrive,
and an opportunity to recognize and
appreciate the spiritual gifts trans Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus.

If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses, we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses, with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens.

This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating gender incongruence to do so faithfully.

How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God’s intention?
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown.

God didn’t intend gender incongruence. He intended for each to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman.

[Notes]
KAT

Next, using these lenses, what can we know about the development of gender incongruence and what God’s intentions were?
Like many things in life, gender incongruence develops from a combination of genetic and biological factors (nature) as well as cultural and familial influences (nurture). No one study points to a particular reason or source for why gender incongruence happens. Nature, Nurture, Yes. 
Additionally, God did not intend for anyone to experience gender incongruence. When God first imagined each of us being born into a perfect world, He intended for each of us to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman. 
When God creates humans in Genesis 1 and 2, He creates them mind, body, and spirit as male-bodied men and female-bodied women. We can assume that pre-fall, there was complete congruence between mind, body, and spirit, and therefore, between biological sex and felt gender.
 
That being said, it's true that Scripture never states explicitly that God intended every person pre-fall to be male-bodied men or female-bodied women. Similar to much of orthodoxy in historic Christianity, the Church has discerned with the Holy Spirit and through dialogue in the body of Christ further clarity needed for day-to-day life. 
But because everything in this world is broken, one of the ways some people were impacted by that brokenness is that they developed gender incongruence.
Does it change? Is there a formula for increasing likelihood of change?
No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence.

While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

[Notes]
KAT

But we want to be clear: no one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. And while some may experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence. Let me explain.
Interestingly, 80% of people who experience gender incongruence as a child experience relief from their gender incongruence by adulthood. It just goes away. Not because the child or their parents do any particular thing. They just get through puberty, and everything feels like it fits. However in about 20% of cases, gender incongruence persists.
But there’s no proven combination of counseling or pastoral care strategies or spiritual exercises to increase the likelihood of a person’s gender incongruence resolving. If an individual sees gender incongruence persisting beyond adolescence and into adulthood, it is likely going to be a lifelong experience.
To be clear, resolved incongruence does not mean that the child’s gender incongruence was ingenuine or that the child was merely confused. And it’s important to note that there is also no way to know for sure if gender incongruence will resolve, and as such, the experience should not be dismissed regardless of the age of the person experiencing incongruence.
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.

All are broken. God can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power. 

[Notes]
KAT

Gender incongruence is a brokenness and one of many manifestations of the brokenness of all of creation as a result of the Fall. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.  
Gender incongruence, just like other forms of pain and brokenness, may tempt a person to soothe their discomfort in sinful ways or attempt to sinfully remake God’s gift of their biological sex, but a person does not sin until they say “yes” to temptation in thought, word, or deed.
And still, we should be quick to remember that even when we sin intentionally or unintentionally, grace abounds more through Jesus Christ. Every person experiences brokenness in one way or another, and because we all experience the hurt and pain that are byproducts of this brokenness, we as believers should be driven to show love and compassion. 
Certainly, in an ideal world people would not experience gender incongruence. Yet the beauty of God and His power is that our brokenness does not keep us from His love and grace because of His son, Jesus Christ. He can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power.
KEY QUESTION:If someone experiences gender incongruence, what determines who they are? Why?

[Notes]
PIETER

So, leaning on the theological understanding we’ve built so far,
I think we’re ready to ask the big question: who am I?

or more specifically, “How does a trans Christian know who they truly are? Know whether they’re supposed to be a man or a woman?”

Well, when any Christian asks, “Who am I? Who was I meant to be?” they’re ultimately asking about ontology
And only God can answer that question.

Ultimately, God knows best who each of us is fundamentally
Because God knows who He meant for each of us to be
And He sees us as we truly are better than anyone else
even better than ourselves

If any Christian is unsure of who they are and how God is inviting them to steward their story,
the best place to start is by exploring what God first intended

Well, as we’ve already stated, when God first imagined each of us born unblemished into a perfect world,
He imagined each of us as either male-bodied men or female-bodied women.

But we live in a broken world, and some experience a distressing incongruence between their biological sex and felt gender.

So when there’s gender incongruence, how do we know what God’s intentions were?



KEY QUESTION: Who am I?
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.

Unfortunately, the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions.

[Notes]
PIETER

Well, If an individual is not intersex and their chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics all indicate the same biological sex,
then we know God’s intentions for the individual’s biological sex.

We know whether someone is a male or female.

And then because we know an individual’s biological sex and we know God generally intended for each of us to be male-bodied men or female-bodied women, then we also know God’s intentions for an individual’s gender.
So when a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence,
we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their experience of their gender is broken.
We know which biological sex and gender God initially gifted them with.
We know who they truly are, in God’s eyes.
For example, if a person is biologically male,
then God intended for that person to be biologically male and feel mentally/psychologically like a man.
If this male experiences gender incongruence
and, as such, does not feel robustly like a man and instead feels more like a woman or somewhere in between a man and a woman, we can recognize that their experience of gender has been negatively impacted by the brokenness of Creation.

We know that God intended to offer this male his maleness and a sense of being a man as a sacred gift,
but unfortunately the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions for the male’s gender.
Available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex.
What about brain-sex / body-sex difference?

[Notes]
PIETER

Now, at this point, some might bring up the idea that most trans people actually experience a brain-sex/body-sex difference,
and as such should be treated as intersex people and we should recognize that we cannot know God’s intentions for their biological sex.

However, available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference
does not exist,
contribute to gender incongruence,
or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex.

Research has actually shown that the variation among male brains and among female brains is greater than the differences between the average male and female brain.

This variance is natural, but does not predict gender incongruence or make a person any more or less male or female.
God created us each uniquely and beautifully.
Our differences and our commonalities reflect God’s handiwork and His intentionality with us.
Share
What intellectual and/or emotional discomfort do you feel toward the following claims:
When a trans person is not intersex, we know God’s intentions for their sex and gender and know that their gender is particularly broken whereas their sex is for the most part as God intended.
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

We’ve answered a lot of questions, but we’ve still got one admittedly difficult theological question left:

What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

First, let me describe steps that a person could take in three different ranges:
social transitioning, hormonal transitioning, and surgical transitioning.

Social transitioning can include name and/or pronoun changes, clothing, hairstyle, wrapping/taping, packing, bathroom use, voice training, etc.
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Social transitioning involves taking steps within one’s social circles to mitigate incongruence non-medically.

These include
name and/or pronoun changes,
adjustments to one’s appearance through clothing and hairstyle changes,
wrapping/taping to flatten the chest,
packing to give the appearance of having a bulge,
using single stall bathrooms,
using the bathroom of people of the opposite sex,
and voice training to raise or lower the pitch of one’s voice. 



What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning involves chemically altering secondary sex characteristics to align with gender identity
Surgical transitioning

[Notes]
PIETER

Hormonal transitioning involves
the use of Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) that chemically alters a person’s secondary sex characteristics to align with their gender identity. 



Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning includes breast augmentation, changing facial features, vocal cord surgery, and/or altering genitalia
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Even today, surgical transitioning is the riskiest aspect of transitioning.

It can include
adding or removing breasts,
various forms of plastic surgery to change facial features or enhance other parts of the body,
vocal cord surgeries, and
altering genitalia.

The most common terms associated with surgical transitioning is “top” (think top half of the body) and “bottom” (refers exclusively to genital alterations) surgery. 

Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) is a sin.

Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

So to what extent is each of these ranges of transition morally neutral or a sin?

Well, if a person who experiences gender incongruence is not intersex,
if we know God’s intentions for the individual’s sex and gender,
and if we know that the person’s gender experience is broken whereas their sex is as God intended,
then taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex can be sinful.
When a trans* Christian undergoes hormonal or surgical transition, they are at risk of responding to broken gender by breaking their biological sex and not being grateful for God’s gift of their sex and faithfully managing their broken gender.
However, in the range of steps considered social transition, the morality of many of those actions depends on the motivation behind the action.
Few of them are inherently sinful.

Each step of social transition could be taken as part of a rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex,
or each step of social transition could be taken merely to reduce the distress of a person’s gender incongruence,
while affirming internally and externally that they are ontologically the biological sex that God intended.

Transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.

Even if some transition may be sinful, it doesn’t remove a person’s ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

While we’ve already noted that transition does not effectively reduce suicide risk,
it’s helpful to remember that, in an ideal world, a trans Christian would consider the moral implications of transition from a place of
positive mental health,
a robust relationship with Jesus,
compassionate church discipleship,
and robust support from friends and family.

Unfortunately, this has rarely been the case. 

In reality, many have taken steps to transition
in times of mental unhealth,
before knowing Jesus,
after leaving the Christian faith,
without compassionate support,
and/or amid harassment from people who call themselves Christians.

When offering discipleship to trans people, as will be covered later with greater nuance, conversations about the morality of social/medical transition will rarely be a first or early conversation in pastoral care that imitates Christ’s love.
Additionally, just because someone chooses to medically transition does not remove their ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
We all make sinful decisions that affect our lives in significant ways,
yet we also know that God takes our sin and brokenness and redeems it for His glory and our good.

Conversation about the morality of transition is incomplete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century.

What will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender?
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

I also want to add that any conversation about the morality of transition
and the steps trans people take to address their distress
is incomplete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century.

Christians have overprescribed gender roles and rules, creating (in part) gender incongruence in some instances and amplifying gender incongruence in other instances.

While conservative advocates might accuse progressive advocates of Gnosticism by falling into mind/body dualism and valuing the mind over the body,
it could equally be argued that conservative advocates often fall into the reserve trap of valuing the body over the mind.

Even if we know that a trans person’s body is as God intended
and it is the mind that is broken,
a person’s gender is just as central to who they are.

Enduring gender incongruence is just as devastating and deserving of compassion as enduring a broken body.

If Christian leaders are going to invite trans Christians to honor God’s gift of their biological sex by refraining from hormonal/surgical transition,
and instead endure the pain of persisting gender incongruence,
then they need to honor the difficulty of that call, even if it’s true.

And recognize the ways that Christians leaders over the decades have made that difficulty greater by overprescribing gender.
God intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women.
Our biological sexes, our felt genders, and cultural gender prescriptions are broken.
God didn’t intend gender incongruence nor do people chose it. It’s a brokenness but not a sin. There’s no formula for changing it.
God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
PIETER

Let’s review what we understand to be God’s wisdom for trans Christians:
The Bible forbids genital mutilation (Deuteronomy 22:5 and Deuteronomy 23:1), cross-dressing as part of cult practices (1 Corinthians 11:2-16), and the elimination of gender difference (1 Corinthians 11:2-16). The Bible makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family (Isaiah 56:1-5, Acts 8:25-39). The Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes (Psalm 51:10-11, Micah 6:8, I Samuel 18:1-3, Proverbs 31, Judges 4:4, Acts 16:14, Luke 7:47,50). The authors of Scripture were aware of trans people.
God first intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women (Genesis 1-3). The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship. God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us.
Everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. Cultural concepts of gender, including arbitrarily assigning preference to one gender or another, are broken.
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown. God didn’t intend gender incongruence. No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin. While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

If a person experiences gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. Social transition steps can be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
PIETER

When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.

Share
What do you find helpful about this articulation of God’s wisdom for trans people? What do you find challenging?
God’s Love & Wisdom
God’s wisdom for gay people
A vision for LGBT+ thriving in your church
Common questions in 1-on-1 discipleship with gay people
Leading with compassion in light of trans suicide risk
God’s wisdom for trans people
Practical tools for trans pastoral care

[Notes]
Okay, so now that we’ve built out a foundational understanding for this conversation, talked about leading with compassionate care in response to high suicide rates, and explored gender ethics,
pastoralcare

[Notes]
let’s wrap up our time together by focusing on some practical tools for pastoral care.
How to minister?
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor lack of choice + explore morally neutral relief
Support acceptance of brokenness/suffering
Address childhood shame from cultural gender
Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage to share their stories & gather

[Notes]
KAT

We’ve got seven suggestions:
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Support acceptance of brokenness and suffering
Address childhood shame from cultural gender stereotypes
Give them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage them to share their stories and gather

1. General posture for ministry
Resist ”transition or suicide!” & “just be normal!”
Instead, believe trans people when they share about their experience
Honor their lack of choice, the cost of faithful stewardship, and the Church’s responsibility
Commit to walking with them, helping them discern, and reminding them of Christ’s love for them and faithfulness to them

[Notes]
First, adopt a general posture of empathy and compassion

Different extremes in the debate about gender incongruence offer trans people equally unhelpful advice:
One side yells, “Just be normal!”
They ignore the reality that trans* people did not choose to experience gender incongruence
and that there is no proven combination of counseling or spiritual practices to eliminate gender incongruence.
Those on this extreme minimize the daily, painful reality of navigating enduring gender incongruence.
They seem to forget that trans* people are also made in the image of God, are greatly valued by Him, 
and that Christians should greatly value trans* people as well.
Then the other side yells, “Transition or suicide!”
They suggest that transition is an effective intervention to address mental illness (including suicidality) 
and that those who hesitate to bless hormonal and surgical transition are increasing suicidality.

resist both of those extremes

Instead, believe trans* people when they share about their experience. 
Honor that faithfully stewarding gender incongruence will be costly and demands the support of trans* people’s siblings in Christ.
Remind trans* Christians that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life. 
While it is painfully difficult to live in a world (and a body) burdened by brokenness, 
brokenness will not be our experience forever; we have a hope and a future in Jesus for resurrected bodies and life when all will be made right.
Finally, take your time to build rapport with trans* Christians you’re ministering to. 
Patiently invest in relationships to earn their trust.
And don’t be surprised when walking together is at times difficult and complicated. 
2. Prioritize addressing any mental health challenges
Proven interventions to reduce suicidality:
Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
A broader community of social support

[Notes]
Second, prioritize addressing mental health challenges

Before jumping into heavy theological questions or difficult discernment about transition, help them gather the resources they need to care for any co-occurring mental health conditions they’re experiencing.
And focus on addressing those before anything else

The following interventions have be scientifically proven to most effectively reduce depression and suicidality:
Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
A broader community of social support
3. Honor lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Recognize their lack of choice.

Help trans Christians resolve what they can by exploring morally neutral options for incongruence relief.

[Notes]
Third, honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Trans* people don’t choose to experience gender incongruence, 
but they do have the responsibility to faithfully steward their brokenness. 

Support trans* Christians as they consider morally neutral options in the range of social transition 
that might provide relief from the gender incongruence. 
Help them weigh each possibility and carefully step forward where the Lord leads. 
Help them resolve what they can and manage what they must.
4. Support acceptance of some brokenness/suffering
Help trans Christians manage what they must by accepting some level of enduring brokenness/suffering.

Hold space for them to grieve acceptance with anger, sadness, fear, and numbness.

[Notes]
Fourth, support their acceptance of some enduring brokenness and hardship

Even if a trans Christian you’re supporting takes some morally neutral steps to reduce their distress, 
they’ll likely continue to experience some level of persisting and painful gender incongruence.
And while hormonal and surgical transition have not been shown to effectively reduce suicidality, 
trans Christians yearning for further relief will certainly be burdened by cultural messages that further transition will eliminate their distress.

Step into that space and encourage trans* Christians you’re ministering to 
to resist further transition that is unlikely to provide the relief they desire, 
and instead invite them to accept some level of enduring brokenness.
Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience
some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life. 
Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness. 
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, 
including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls!
Help trans* Christians you’re ministering to explore what Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering 
and how they found a way to accept persisting brokenness. 
And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.
Some pain will be unavoidable.
Trans* people can’t avoid using a name for themselves, using pronouns, 
going to the bathroom, wearing clothes, or speaking with a pitched voice. 
There will be daily, unavoidable, and painful reminders for trans* people of their gender incongruence.
Make space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb. 
Reassure them that their feelings are valid and that their pain is real. 
Promise them that you won’t leave their side, and then stay.
5. Address any childhood shame from cultural gender
Childhood gender incongruence combines with shame for preferences contrary to gender stereotypes, amplifying internal shame & heightening fears of rejection.

Identify shame memories, feel through them, reject lies, and remember their value in Christ. 

[Notes]
KAT

Fifth, identify and heal any painful memories of being shamed for preferences contrary to cultural gender stereotypes.
Most of us, regardless of gender experience, can recall moments from our childhoods when we preferred something that kids of our biological sex weren’t supposed to prefer. Not based on any biblical prescriptions for gender but because of arbitrary gender over-prescriptions from culture. And then we were shamed by parents and siblings and friends and pastors.
Directly or indirectly, we were given a choice: 1) reject your preference, learn to dislike what you like, learn to like what you dislike, and internalize shame to fit in or 2) continue to like what you like, continue dislike what you dislike, and continue to be shamed and teased and rejected. It was a lose-lose for many kids and teens.
Forced choices are particularly painful for kids who experience gender incongruence, leading to shame and rejection. Some of the distress trans* Christians experience in the present may come from unprocessed childhood moments, they can haunt their present. 
Care for trans* Christians by helping them identify memories where they have felt shame, create space for them to process lingering sadness, anger or fear. Identify and name arbitrary forced choices while reassuring them of their inherent worth and value as image bearers. Celebrate God’s creativity and unique way He has designed others to express themselves, even when it’s contrary to cultural stereotypes.
6. Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Parents and pastors can join trans Christians by resisting historical over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are, while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.

[Notes]
PIETER

Sixth, give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes

American culture has arbitrarily attributed preferences and affinities to gender that have nothing inherently to do with gender.While the core of a trans* Christian’s distress is an internal sense that their biological sex and felt gender are incongruent,
feeling forced to comply with arbitrary cultural expectations can multiply distress.
Help trans* Christians reduce pain related to their gender by giving them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes.

Parents and pastors can join trans* Christians by resisting over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are,
while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.
Giving trans* Christians (and any Christian) permission to express themselves in culturally atypical ways
may raise questions or concerns with siblings in Christ who are less aware of the arbitrary nature of gender stereotypes.

Pastors and parents can protect trans* Christians from harassment for their preferences and affinities
by engaging with concerned believers, 
assuring them that rejection of cultural gender does not mean rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex or gender.

7. Encourage to share their stories and gather together 
Trans Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved.

Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding.

[Notes]
KAT

And last but not least, encourage Christians navigating gender incongruence to share their stories with siblings in Christ
and gather with other trans* Christians.
Trans* Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved. 
They need to share their stories, and they need to see their siblings in Christ respond with curiosity and compassion. 
At the same time, our churches need to hear the stories of trans* Christians who are faithfully stewarding their brokenness.
Cisgender Christians can learn from the courage and resiliency of trans* Christians, 
and cisgender Christians can gain self-awareness about the ways cultural gender stereotypes haunt them by empathizing with trans* Christians.
Pastors and parents also need to encourage trans* Christians to gather with other trans* Christians. 
Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding. 
Each of these opportunities for Christian fellowship can contribute to greater spiritual growth, 
discovering shared meaning in suffering, and enjoying healthy intimacy in a community of believers.
Share
Which of these pastoral care skills would be easiest for you to employ? Most difficult? Why?
policies

[Notes]
PIETER

We’ve waited until now to talk about pronouns, names, bathrooms, and public presentation of leaders.
That’s intentional.

Too often that’s where divisive political conversation starts.
But until we’ve gotten to know trans people, cared for their immediate needs,
personally studied God’s wisdom for trans people,
and consistently offered compassionate pastoral care
–only after we’ve done all of that,
should we wade into these trickier policy questions.

But, we know you’ll be sucked into these conversations,
even if you’d prefer to avoid them,
so we want to offer you our opinions, our suggestions for how you could engage constructively.
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
Given names and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of the pain and tension that is felt every day.

Identifying as trans can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence” or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between).

[Notes]
PIETER

many people have a wide variety of opinions and beliefs when it comes to names/pronouns and identifying as trans*.
Identifying as trans, similar to identifying as gay, bi, lesbian, etc.,
can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence”,
or as much as“I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self”,
(and everything in between).
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.

If someone you’re pastoring is considering name/pronoun changes, pray and discern together what God might be calling the person to.

[Notes]
PIETER
In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.

Listen to the identifiers, names, and pronouns that the individual uses, and then use those same words as an act of hospitality.

You might ask the individual what they mean when they use those words.
Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language.

This is a simple but effective way to diffuse potential tension early in the relationship and open the door for future conversation.
For those using the word trans or alt pronouns or names to communicate that they are a fundamentally different kind of person and to signal a rejection of God’s gift of their biological sex,
you might have a different kind of conversation.

If the person is someone you’ve had years of relationship with
And you demonstrated your care for them
And they’ve invited you to disciple them through some of this stuff
Then you might push on them about the wisdom of them using those words.

Again, not because of the words themselves,
but because of the intentions behind the words.

You might ultimately choose to continue to respect their pronoun and name request, but you also will have registered with them your perspective that those preferences might not be wisest
This is really complex
You’ll notice that we’re hesitating from giving you a one-size-fits-all answer
Because we don’t feel like their are none
There’s so much nuance
For example, the difference between gender neutral pronouns versus opposite-gender pronouns.
Some Christians may feel comfortable using gender neutral pronouns because it could reasonably be argued that they’re neutral. They’re not necessarily communicating anything about gender ethics.
But those Christians might not be comfortable with opposite-gender pronouns because they seem to unavoidably signal a rejection of God’s gift of a person’s biological sex.
Or another example.
Consider the difference between name abbreviations versus long-standing nicknames versus new nicknames adopted specifically to signal social transition. Christians may feel comfortable with using the first two but not the last one.

What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
Respect the request of parents (particularly for kids and younger teens).

If older teens are driving themselves to activities, consider respecting their request.

[Notes]
PIETER
And then there’s the tricky case of what to do with minors.

Here’s my suggestion: I default to respecting the preferences of parents, particularly if they’re kids or younger teens.

Ultimately, discipleship is parents’ responsibility, and I’ll respect that.
If parents want me to honor a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that.
If parents want me to ignore a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that. 

But in that case, I will clearly communicate to the kid that
God loves trans people.
He’s not surprised by the questions they’re navigating
or offended by their existence.
He wants to walk with them
and offer them His wisdom.
And I feel the same.
I love them.
I want to walk with them.

As a policy, I respect the request of parents, but I want them to know that that doesn’t change anything about my care for them.
I hope they’ll understand.

That being said, I’ll generally respect a kid or young teen’s request until I hear something otherwise from parents.

Now, when it comes to older teens who are driving themselves to church, for example, I’ll generally respect their request.
What bathrooms should trans Christians use?
Most trans people prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms.

If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom.

[Notes]
Most trans people prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms–
If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom.

To avoid controversy, you can label it as a “family” bathroom and privately communicate to trans people that it’s an all-gender single-occupancy bathroom available to them.
Many trans people will avoid using the bathroom at church if no single-occupancy bathrooms are available.
Different expectations for leader gender expression?
Churches may call leaders to narrower gender expression, allowing for more diverse gender expression from non-leaders.

But calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations may communicate an unspoken message that non-leaders conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved.

[Notes]
PIETER

And last, I want to address gender expression by leaders
And wisdom for public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders

If a church defines rules for gender expression,
it is important that that church be able to defend those rules and apply those justifications consistently across all populations.

Remember that most standards for public presentation are culturally-created,
not instituted by God for all people in all places in all times.

And remember the ways that gender overprescription have exacerbated or created gender incongruence in faithful believers.

Churches may call leaders to more narrow gender expression, allowing for more diverse gender expression at the level of membership,
but asking leaders to conform to more traditional gender expression for the sake of those they lead.

At the same time, calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations that are not morally necessary may communicate to membership an unspoken message that they must conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved,
creating a barrier to the gospel and discipleship under the Lordship of Jesus.
How can Christians respond to LGBT+ Pride Month?
Confess sins of past Christians against LGBT+ people
When you see something Pride-related, ask yourself, "How is communicating value and protection?”
Take the next step in LGBT+ ministry at your church!

[Notes]
Decades ago, Christians failed to offer gay people a place where they could share their story and find belonging as they faithfully stewarded their enduring same-sex attractions (SSAs).Instead, churches offered (1) false hope of sexual orientation change (leading to suicidality and loss of faith), (2) taught that merely experiencing SSAs was a sin, (3) policed sexual identity language, (4) barred any with enduring SSAs from ministry, and (5) passed off gays to therapists/ministries instead of learningIn response to this rejection, gay people sought belonging elsewhere, and when they couldn't find it, they attempted to create it for themselves.Gay Pride is a celebration, reminding gay people that they're valued and accepted. It's also intentionally showy (or even aggressive) to reassure gay people that they'll defend and protect each other.So how can Christians respond compassionately?1. Name and confess the sins of past Christians that led many to abandon Jesus and find family elsewhere.2. When you see something Pride-related, practice asking yourself, "How is this attempting to reassure gay people they're valued and that they'll be protected?"3. Ask leaders in your church what they're offering to gay people. How is that similar or different from the false promises and destructive practices of the past?
q&a
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
“That’s a great question. If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable, we like to do our best to use those words. Even if we personally don’t think those are the best words to use, we can choose to be polite and use those words.”

[Notes]
PIETER
Some churches may prefer to respond to kid with a standard response of,
“That’s a great question.
If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable,
we like to do our best to use those words. Even if we personally don’t think those are the best words to use,
we can choose to be polite and use those words.
Or you could say something like,
“That’s a great question.
God made girls with girl parts
and to feel like girls on the inside.
And He made boys with boy parts
and to feel like boys on the inside.
But for some people, it doesn’t feel like all of that lines up neatly and they’re figuring that out with their parents.
While they’re figuring that out,
we choose to be polite by using the names or other words that make people feel most comfortable.”
Or you could say,
“That’s a great question.
If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable,
we like to do our best to use those words. I’d encourage you to ask your parents about how they’d encourage you to think about this stuff.”
If a parent confronts you,
particularly if they’re most conservative, you could say something like,
“We respect the authority of parents to disciple their kids,
so if they want us to use alternate pronouns and names, we respect that request.
That doesn’t mean we agree with that request.
It just means that we defer to parents to raise their kids in the Lord.
If kids press us on the topic,
we note that
God made girls with girl parts
and to feel like girls on the inside.
And He made boys with boy parts
and to feel like boys on the inside.
Then we name that some kids don’t feel like all of that lines up neatly
and they’re figuring that out with their parents.
We clarify that we’re using the words people have asked us to use in order to be polite.
And we encourage kids to ask their parents how their parents encourage them to think about this stuff.”
So like I said, a lot of complexity,
a lot of nuance.

The biggest thing I want to communicate is that we can be nuanced and polite
and defer to the authority of parents to raise their kids in the Lord.

