God’s Love & Wisdom for Non-Straight Students

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 20,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 20,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

AND NOTE ABOUT TERMINOLOGY

Good News for Gay People
Is the gospel great news for gay people?

[Notes]
I want to start with a simple question
But probably the most important question

Is the gospel great news for gay people?
Or let’s lower the bar: Is the gospel at least good news for gay people?
It doesn’t seem like it.
Too often, churches seem to teach that the God of the Bible is not for gay people. That God hates gay people.
At best, churches are silent.
Then friends with a more progressive sexual sexual tell the same story but in a different way.
They say that the Bible—or at least how we’re read the Bible for the past 2,000 years—is bad news for gay people.
Our churches and our friends would lead us to believe that God’s teachings are bad news for sexual minorities.

And for good reason.
Good News for Gay People
22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US
19.3 million (86%) grew up in church
10.4 million (54%) have left the faith

[Notes]
In the most extensive study of LGBT+ people and the Church,
Andrew Marin’s Us Versus Us reveals that
of the 22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US,
19.3 million (86%) grew up in church.
Of those, 10.4 million LGBT+ people have left the faith—that’s 54% of LGBT+ people who grew up in the Church.
Good News for Gay People
Gay teens are 5x more likely to attempt suicide
Religious LGBT+ youth are 38% more likely to be suicidal
Gay teens from highly rejecting families are 8.4x more likely to attempt suicide

[Notes]
Why?
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their peers.
LGBT+ youth who say religion is important to them are 38% more likely to be suicidal than their non-religious LGBT+ peers,
suggesting that homophobic religious beliefs increase teens’ vulnerability to depression.
And gay teens who come from highly rejecting families are 8.4 times more likely to attempt suicide than other gay teens.

Good News for Gay People
Hate crimes are committed against LGBT+ people every day
73% of LGBT+ people view evangelical churches as unfriends

[Notes]
Hate crimes are committed against LGBT people every day.
And according to the Pew Research Center, 73% of LGBT people view evangelical churches as unfriendly.

God’s Love & Wisdom
What is God’s good news for gay people?
How can ministers respond compassionately to tough questions?
How can we respond when students share about their sexuality?

[Notes]
But what if God actually wants to offer the best things to gay people?
What if our churches have done a poor job of offering what God wants to offer,
but God’s wisdom is actually very good news for gay people?

Today I want to explore that question
Then I want to take a look at how we can engage in the toughest conversations that come up in LGBT+ ministry
And I want to end with focusing How we can respond when students share about their sexuality

Ohh, and a quick note about ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people
The specific guidance for discipleship are very different and deserve their own space
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry
my story

[Notes]
I shared earlier that I’m personally convinced of a historic sexual ethic
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

Bit out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity
I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.
I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.
These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started EQUIP in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family
what do I believe?

[Notes]
In light of my story and my faith, what have I come to understand God’s wisdom for my life to be?
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons
To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch
(2) For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions
(3) For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a traditional sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
We believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to traditional sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a progressive sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction

For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So in 2018 some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers
Share
What did you find helpful about this articulation of God’s wisdom? Challenging?
How is this different than ways you’ve shared about God’s wisdom in the past?
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singleness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
You see, even if I could somehow convince myself theologically that God would bless a same-sex marriage between two Christians
I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my life and the lives of others

Primarily, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobats to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said
So they continue believing that God fully blesses same-sex marriages,
but they just concluded that the Bible is not binding or authoritative for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?

and listen, I don’t want that for my gay friends
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith

I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that a traditional sexual ethic is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, there gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a traditional sexual ethic because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic




the problem

[Notes]
But here’s the problem
Christians aren’t doing this well
And the damage isn’t limited to LGBT+ people

The problem(s)
God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is for companionship & mutual fulfillment.
We only have to have kids if and when we want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

[Notes]
Here’s what Christians really seem to believe today
The problem(s)
As a result…
Straight Christians are suffering from higher divorce rates, lower marriage rates, and lonely singleness
Gay Christians are tempted by the double standard into a destructive victim mentality

[Notes]
What are the results of having those beliefs?
It's hurting straight people

straight Christians are casually engaging in romance
having sex outside of marriage
Suffering from near-ubiquitous pornography addiction
unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
and engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage
half of Christian marriage ends in divorce
and marriage rates have declined over 60% over the past half-century
few straight Christians consider Christ’s invitation to vocational singleness
relegating celibacy to a curse of loneliness for the sake of the gospel
straight people who are involuntarily single suffer from the lack of support
and a 2017 Barna Study found that singles struggle more with depression, anxiety, doubt in God’s existence, and rebounding from doubt

Ultimately, our looking the other way when the Bible calls straight people to inconvenient sexual stewardship
Our bending the rules for straight people
Doesn’t really help straight people
It enables their own destruction
In the words of Jesus in Matthew 19, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning.”
But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.

This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.

Christian leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.
the solution

[Notes]
But there’s a solution
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
Your community can become a place where gay students thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
And in the process bless every Christian in your community

How?

First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.

As we’ve already mentioned, most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support
They enable straight Christians to ignore God’s wisdom to their own detriment
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people
can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort

Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics,
but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.
They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.
Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.
Share
How might your students respond to this nuanced presentation of God’s wisdom for gay people? What would they find compelling? Lacking?
What is God’s good news for gay people?
How can ministers respond compassionately to tough questions?
How can we respond when students share about their sexuality?
God’s Love & Wisdom

[Notes]
So we’ve teased out God’s good news for gay people, including casting a vision for how Christian communities can better support gay Christians committed to God’s wisdom

Next let’s tackle 8 questions that gay people often ask pastors as they are making sense of their faith and sexuality
I want to be clear: I’m not offering responses to these questions so you can go find the gay people in your community and tell them the answers
But I’m pretty confident that none of yall would do that
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when gay people raise them
Or, you might even have a gay person in your community asking you to lead them in making sense of their faith and sexuality
In that case, you can create space for these questions, listen well, and help the gay people in your community think well about them

Note: some of these questions and discussions may be more challenging for those of you who lean more conservative
And others will be more challenging for those of you who lean more liberal
But all of them are conversations we need to be prepared to engage in with God’s love and wisdom
the big questions

[Notes]
Okay, first, a student might ask: Will you treat me differently now that you know?
The Big Questions
Will you treat me differently now that you know?
Honesty
Honor courage in sharing

[Notes]
If your honest response is that you don’t see the any differently, then say that

If it’s more true for you that new information
—particularly information that has been a significant part of a person’s life—
always leads to seeing someone differently,
but that you see the person more fully and not as lesser,
Then say that!

You can also respond by honoring the individual’s courage for sharing his or her story
For many gay people, it’s terrifying to share about their sexuality with a pastor or Christian leader
The Big Questions
Do you think I chose to be gay?
None of us are how God made us to be
Neither born gay nor chose to be gay

[Notes]
Second, a student might ask: Do you think I chose to be gay?

If a student asks this, they’re getting at the class question: do people choose to be gay, or are they born gay?

I want to be clear upfront: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
People do not choose their sexual orientation.

Now to the second question: Are people born gay?
Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.
And if God intended people to be gay, He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.
So are people born gay?

Scientific study of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual found that 52% of male twins were both gay¹.
However, as the study was replicated, that number oscillated over time from 48%² to 65.8%³ and then down to 11%⁴ and 7.7%⁵.
If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so the findings suggest that same-sex attraction is not genetically determined but may be genetically predisposed,
as the frequency of same-sex attraction is higher among twins where one twin experiences same-sex attraction than among the general population.

Scientists have also studied hormone levels in the womb in an attempt to discover a relationship between irregular hormone levels and same-sex attraction,
but those studies have been similarly inconclusive.

The consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
As a result, we would conclude that no one is born gay:
scientific evidence does not support the claim that sexual orientation is genetically determined.

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be
we are all corrupted at a genetic level before birth, formed brokenly in the womb, and quickly injured by the broken world we are born into.
None of us are how God made us to be.

So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.
More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).
The Big Questions
Did God make me gay?
Does God make people gay?
Give people over to “a depraved mind”?
Allow people to develop same-sex 				attraction?
Play no part?

[Notes]
Third, a student might ask: Did God make me gay?

Or does God give people over to a “depraved mind” of same-sex attraction as a result of sexual immorality and idolatry?
Or does God just allow same-sex attraction to develop?
Or did God play no part in the development of same-sex attraction?
The Big Questions
Did God make me gay?
Did not intend for anyone to be gay or make anyone gay (James 1:13, Romans 1:26-27) 
We are all corrupted at a genetic level and grow up in a broken world (Psalm 51:5) 
God allowed it to happen (Romans 5:12)

[Notes]
Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are unnatural, they are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God doesn’t not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.
Experiencing same-sex attraction—me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay—is a result of the Fall, as I’ve already shared

Yet being gay—experiencing same-sex attraction—is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold my attractions against me.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls.
The Big Questions
Did God make me gay?
If God protected us from the consequences of our actions and the actions of others, would we really have choice?
God seeks to redeem all brokenness for our good and His glory (Romans 8:28) 

[Notes]
We also do not choose who we are attracted to, but clearly we are gay, so at the very least, God allowed it.
So if it’s not what God intended and broken, but God allowed it and it’s not His will to change it for the vast majority of people, how is that fair?
Remember our discussion of why bad things happen to innocent people and free process from earlier

Many may not find that explanation satisfying, but ultimately I am comforted by God’s promise in Romans 8:28.
God has been faithful to redeem my enduring same-sex attraction.
My faithfulness has glorified God, and following His wisdom has led to truer intimacy, deeper meaning, life-giving family, and more satisfying purpose.
The Big Questions
Will you try to make me straight?
No proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change
Praying for change with any level of expectation is dangerous and unnecessary

[Notes]
Fourth, a student might ask: Will you try to make me straight?

Scripture does not promise permanent relief from any temptation in this lifetime.
Plus, limited high-quality research demonstrates that 96% of people who participated in sexual orientation change efforts experienced no change in their same-sex attractions,
and even these results were from self-reports that cannot be verified.
Moreover, scientific studies have demonstrated that sexual orientation changes efforts increase the risk of suicide attempts by an alarming 92%. (nearly doubling attempts)
There is no proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change.
Do miracles happen? Sometimes.
But praying for change with any level of expectation is dangerous.

The likelihood of a student’s attractions changing even a little are the same as them getting into Harvard, becoming a millionaire, or playing high school baseball and eventually going pro.
Would it be wise to pray for those things expectantly?
What happens when their faith in God, their belief that God is good, or their belief that God loves them hinges on whether thet get into Harvard, become a millionaire, or their same-sex attractions change?

The frequent harm of ex-gay programs outweighs the benefits few experience.
Moreover, the search for change is unnecessarily risky:
LGBT+ Christians don’t need to change their attractions to belong and thrive in our communities according to a traditional sexual ethic.

Based on this, I would caution you from suggesting a student seek to change their attractions.
It’s a brokenness, but we don’t choose who we are attracted to, and there is no formula for changing it.
It is better to ask God how He wants to redeem our broken sexualities for our good and His glory.
The Big Questions
Where is God in all of this?
Reassure that God is not surprised or waiting for orientation change
Be honest with God—He can take it
Reject shame as a barrier to intimacy

[Notes]
Fifth, a student might ask: Where is God in all of this?

For many gay people, we felt shame before God about our sexuality at an early age
Then we tried to hide our sexuality from God so that we felt less shame
Then the Bible and prayer were used as weapons by Christians trying to make us straight
And then when we realized that we did nothing to bring our sexual orientation about, we couldn’t do anything to change it, and God didn’t respond to our pleas for Him to change it,
we were angry at God for allowing us to be gay and not relieving us of this burden
All of this combines to leave gay students feeling like God is far away
They desperately want to feel close to God, but they don’t know how anymore

How can we help students reconnect with God?

First, we can reassure them that God is not surprised, and He sees them as valuable (Psalm 139)
Reassure them that they don’t have to become straight for God to love them
We are all broken and accepted before a gracious and merciful God who will never abandon us

Second, encourage them to be honest with themselves and God—God can take it
I was really angry with God but suppressed that anger for a decade
Finally, I had a mentor who encouraged me to be honest
Jacob wrestling God—it is intimate
I had to express that anger before I could believe that God loves me—and honestly, I am still working through that

Third, help them clear out the shame that has become a barrier to connecting with God
Shame is Satan’s primary weapon in many experiences that involve secrecy and particularly those that are sexual in nature.
Respond to that shame by helping the individual identify and reject shaming messages they tell themselves and hear from others.
Plus, people may find relief from shame when they share their stories with others.
In contrast, when we tell people to hide their attractions, not to talk about them, not to find community with people like them who understand their story,
We heap on the shame
The Big Questions
Can I call myself gay?
Practice term-mirroring as hospitality
Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior
Create space for Christians to use the word gay

[Notes]
Sixth, a student may ask: Can I call myself gay?

Particularly in conversation with LGBT+ non-Christians or when first meeting LGBT+ Christians,choose to mirror their terminology as an act of hospitality.
Instead of letting language be an early barrier to conversation, ask them what words they use to describe themselves,
ask what those words mean to them, and then choose to use those words with those definitions in conversation.
This doesn’t mean you’re affirming their use of that word or that definition.
Rather, you’re choosing to defer to them in that space so that you can focus on much more important topics.

Conflation of attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior is often a source of disagreement about language.
Instead, distinguish between the four different aspects of sexuality, like we discussed earlier

Next, create space for students to use the word “gay.”
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage.
There is no perfect term for ministering to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay young adults in your ministry, and straight culture warriors among your donors and alumni.
I choose the word most effective with gay teens and young adults and then make clear what I mean.

I think it’s important to distinguish between using the word “gay” phenomenologically versus ontologically.
I am using “gay” phenomenologically, not ontologically.
When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based one one’s experience or what it appears to be.
In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design.
When I use the word “gay,” I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay.
I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay.
I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same sex, and using the word “gay” is, in my opinion, the best word to describe that experience.

Finally, when I use the word “gay,'“ I am ultimately taking advantage of an opportunity to share the gospel.
I say, “I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
With this, I communicate that I am a child of God, first and foremost.
Jesus, and Jesus alone, sits on the throne of my life.
And I experience same-sex attraction.
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world.
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences.
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences.
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences.
I use the word “gay” to identify with people, not to identify with sin.
The Big Questions
What do I do with my loneliness?
Ask, “What do you really need?”
Normalize intimacy needs
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Recognize meeting intimacy needs in healthy ways as an important spiritual discipline

[Notes]
Seventh, a student might ask: What do I do with my loneliness

First, you can respond by asking them what they really need?
Do they really need something sexual or romantic?
Or do they need someone to talk, someone they know will be home when they get home, someone to celebrate with, someone to hold them when they cry
Often when we describe what we really need, its rarely something exclusively romantic or sexual

Next, normalize having intimacy needs, needing other people
If Jesus, the author and perfector of our faith needed the angels to attend to him in the wilderness and begged his disciples to stay up with him and pray with him before he was taken away—if our savior was a human with intimacy needs, its okay for us to have needs, its normal

Then recognize that if they don’t meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways, their broken flesh will reach out for unsatisfying and destructive alternatives
Therefore, proactively meeting their intimacy needs in healthy ways is an important part of taking care of their temple
As Christians who reject spirit-body dualism, we need to embrace that taking care of our body is just as important as taking care of our soul
So our intimacy needs aren’t something to be ignored, they are something to be fulfilled
The Big Questions
What do I do with my loneliness?
Same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
Seek healthy relationships with safe friends

[Notes]
Next, we can point out that same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
This doesn’t mean that if I meet all of my intimacy needs today, I won’t be gay tomorrow
But I have seen that when I’m getting what I really need—healthy friendship with other men—my desires for something romantic or sexual are easier to dismiss

So encourage those you disciple to seek out healthy relationships with safe friends
My life got better when I stopped ignoring my loneliness and started meeting my needs in healthy ways with deep friendship
And to this day, if I am struggling with lust, instead of shaming myself, I want my first response to be asking myself whether I have been meeting my intimacy needs in healthy ways (which I haven’t)

I think some of this question isn’t just “what can I do with my loneliness today?”
But also, “how do I keep from being lonely in my 40s, 50s, and so on?”
To answer that, lets move to the last big question
The Big Questions
What future can I hope for?
A lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship
Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world
Obedience to God’s teachings and surrendering our brokenness to God will bring goodness (Jeremiah 7:23)

[Notes]
Eighth, students might ask: What future can I hope for?

For gay people like me who have been stewarding our sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic for awhile, particularly in vocational singleness, this is our biggest question
We can white-knuckle our way through celibacy for a couple of years
But after awhile its exhausting to walk out a vocation with often little support from our church, family, or friends
Plus as we age, our friends get married, have kids, and don’t have time or space for us in their lives
We’re tired of hearing pastors tell us, “Jesus can be everything you need,” when those pastors don’t live that life
Those pastors have a spouse and kids to go home to every night

So, what future can gay Christian hope for?

First, we can recognize that all people are called to a lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship, whether they are gay or straight.

Second, we can highlight that individuals shouldn’t focus their long-term goals on eliminating same-sex attraction.
Instead, we can encourage those we serve to make sense of their sexuality and grow in sexual stewardship,
but ultimately encourage them to seek fulfillment in intimacy with God and His family and meaningful work to redeem Creation
***opportunities no less available to those who experience same-sex attraction
--That’s what we’re really made for!

Plus, remind them that obedience to God’s teachings about sexual stewardship
and surrendering our brokenness to God
will bring increasing goodness in our lives (Jeremiah 7:23).



The Big Questions
What future can I hope for?
God invites everyone to vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
In communities that have become places where gay people can thrive according to God’s wisdom, both are equally good and available to gay people

[Notes]
What kind of relationships is God offering gay students?
Well, God invites everyone to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Including gay people
In communities that have become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic,
both Christian marriage and vocational singleness are equally good and available to those who experience same-sex attraction.

But there in lies the problem
I’ve never met a Christian community that is a place where gay people can thrive—with reasonable effort—according to a traditional sexual ethic
If we’re being honest, most of our communities aren’t places that can offer gay people much hope right now
The best way you can answer this question is by being honest
For most of you, an honest answer is,
“I wish this weren’t the case, but our community has been doing a poor job of supporting single and gay people for awhile.
I wish I could promise you that that will get better soon, but I can’t.
The cross you’ll bear will probably be more painful than many of your peers.
I am sorry.
The world is not supposed to be this way.
Our community is not supposed to be this way.
So I personally give you permission to hold my feet to the fire on this. Don’t stop reminding me that things must be different, and quickly.”

And finally after you apologize, affirm their need for committed, intimate family
Ultimately, they want hope that they will find family
God has created each of us for family
Yet most gay people have had a hard time finding it
So help them find that

Share
Which of these questions/conversations would you feel most comfortable engaging in? Most uncomfortable? Why?
What are hesitations to first holding straight Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?
What is God’s good news for gay people?
How can ministers respond compassionately to tough questions?
How can we respond when students share about their sexuality?

God’s Love & Wisdom

[Notes]
Okay, so we’ve teased out God’s good news for gay people
We’ve explored how we can respond compassionately to the 8 toughest questions that come up in LGBT+ ministry

I want to close with a brief section about how we can respond effectively and compassionately when students do share about their sexuality with you

when a student “comes out”

[Notes]
How can you respond with the love, wisdom, and patience of Jesus when a student comes out to you?

When a student “comes out”
Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a progressive sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex romance

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.

[Notes]
Well first, let’s define what it means for someone to come out

Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.
But often teens and preteens coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics.
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.

When a student “comes out”
Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. Students share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.
When a student “comes out”
Avoid words/phrases like
homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual",
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as inflammatory and unsafe.

When a student “comes out”
Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
Don't share their story with others without their permission.
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.

When a student “comes out”
Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Embody Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try using whatever words they use in the ways they use them as an act of hospitality.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”
When a student “comes out”
Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed), make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When a student “comes out”
Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.

Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When a student “comes out”
What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try starting with these:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for the *very first* conversations. If you already have or enter into a discipleship relationship with the student, you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship. But remember, resistance to a traditional sexual ethic is much more about either (1) not believing a God really exists, (2) not believing that God really knows what’s best for us better than we do, or (3) not believing that we know who that God is by reading the Scriptures with the Church historic

How do you have those ongoing discipleship questions? Start by exploring those three fundamental questions, slowly walk through sexual stewardship for all people, and make space for 10 common LGBT-specific questions that we covered in our lab: LINK
When a student “comes out”
Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first

Don’t expect gay Christians to follow God’s wisdom until you’ve made thriving accessible

[Notes]
Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a traditional sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a traditional sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned them to loneliness if committed to celibacy.

Better arguments won't convince them of the goodness of God's wisdom.
What will?
How can we offer a winsome witness on these topics in progressive environments?
Being a winsome witness
Recognize the sins of the Church
Offer clarity as a form of charity
Publicly commit to doing better
Cultivate thriving in the lives of Side B gay Christians
Call straight people to sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.

[Notes]
First, recognize the sins of Christians in the past.
In particular, pray the gay away solutions, double standards for sexual ethics, paltry support of celibacy, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate.

Second, offer clarity as a form of charity.
Be clear about what you understand God’s wisdom to be for sexual stewardship.

Third, publicly commit to doing better and taking practical steps.
Be explicit. Tell them what your ministry is going to do differently. And then do it!

In particular (fourth), I’d encourage you to take the steps necessary to support gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic
in ways that actually bear undeniably good fruit. Realize that vision for a thriving community that we explored earlier.

And fifth, call straight people to a high standard of sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.
When we hold straight people to a lower standard of sexual stewardship than gay people, we lose credibility and hurt straight people.
And vocational singleness won’t be viable for gay people until a meaningful minority of straight people are accepting God’s call.

So keep meeting with sexual minority students who doubt God’s love or the wisdom of a traditional sexual ethic.
And outside of those conversations, get busy pushing your community to become a place where they could actually thrive according to God's wisdom.

questions?

[Notes]
How can you respond with the love, wisdom, and patience of Jesus when a student comes out to you?

