


CONSISTENCY


[Notes]
Today, we’re going to talk about a couple of different ideas, but they all have one thing in common: consistency
The church must be consistent in what it believes and how it applies that
We can’t have a different set of rules for gay people than we have for straight people
We can’t take what the Bible has to say about marriage seriously for gay people, but then look the other way for straight people
We can’t tell gay people that celibacy is a good option, but then never expect straight people to do it
Today, we’re going to talk about consistency

I was prepping for these classes at a friend’s house who was a philosophy minor at Vanderbilt
And as I shared my outline for today, he remarked: You know you’ve had a good conversation about ethics when everyone leaves feeling guilty
So that’s my goal for today




Consistency



Christians need to take what the Bible has to say about Christian marriage more seriously
Christians need to take what the Bible has to say about singleness for the sake of the kingdom more seriously
Christians need to invite all Christians to open-handedly submit the question of Christian marriage or vocational singleness to God

[Notes]
Here are three ways I think Christians need to be more consistent that I want to talk about today



MARRIAGE


[Notes]
So first, Christians need to take what the Bible has to say about Christian marriage more seriously




Christian Marriage



Lifetime vocation between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy, raise children for the Body of Christ, and embody the gospel for each other and the world

[Notes]
For 2,000 years, a vast majority of theologians, Church Mothers and Fathers, and Christians have taught that Christian marriage—a marriage blessed and sustained by God—is…

How exactly do it embody the gospel?



Christian Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually

[Notes]
Christian marriage was designed by God to be a reflection of the love of God found in the trinity and between Christ and the Church
It is supposed to be complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable
Practically, what does that look like?



Christian Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences
Hospitable – opening one’s home up to those outside of the nuclear family

[Notes]
Now, there’s two that I notice here that your average American church today doesn’t take seriously
Procreative and Faithful
Most American churches have accepted the major tenants of the Sexual Revolution and separated procreation from marriage
Few American Christians accept that procreation is a central part of God’s design for marriage
Instead, most American Christians use contraception and procreate if and when it is convenient for them

On top of that, most American churches have backed off of the Bible’s teachings about divorce
That God does not recognize divorces
There is no grounds for divorce of a legitimate Christian marriage
(comment about adultery)

So here’s where I want to call the church to be consistent: you can’t have your cake and eat it to
Either you hold the line on marriage for both gay and straight people
Or you back off of the line for both



Share



What steps do churches need to take to take what the Bible has to say about Christian marriage more seriously?



CELIBACY


[Notes]
Second, Christians need to take what the Bible has to say about singleness for the sake of the kingdom more seriously

And the first step to doing that is actually teaching what the Bible has to say about this singleness
I’ll speak for myself: I never hear my parents or church growing up teach about celibacy
It wasn’t until a month ago that I’ve ever heard a pastor preach about this
I’ve been going to church for 28 years
So let me share with you what the Bible has to say about singleness

To do this justice, I would need to walk us through 7 different passages
Genesis 1:27-28, 2:18
Isaiah 56: 3-5
Matthew 19: 1-12
Luke 18: 28-30
Luke 20: 34-36
1 Corinthians 7: 1-40
1 Timothy 5: 5-15

But we don’t have time for that, so I’m just going to work through Matthew 19:1-12, and we’ll hit most of the major ideas




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 1-3: When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan. Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there. Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”




[Notes]
What is this passage so central to theology of celibacy?
Because in this passage, Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy—he reveals to us that God has a specific design for lifetime, abstinent singleness for the sake of the kingdom. Jesus lets us know that this vocation is called by God, normative, permanent, and has unique practical and theological purposes 

Then read:
Verses 1-3: When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan. Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there. Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 1-3
The conservative Pharisees are inviting Jesus to side with liberal leaders on the subject of divorce




[Notes]
v.1-3
To understand what’s behind the Pharisees’ question in verse 3 and beyond, we need some background
According to Thurian, there were two schools of thought on the subject of divorce
The school of Hillel that allowed divorced for a spoilt meal or after finding a prettier woman
And the school of Shammai, which this group of Pharisees belonged to, that permitted divorce only in the case of adultery
There question in verse 3 is a trap—an invitation for Jesus to support the more liberal school of Hillel



Max Thurian, pg 25-6
“The moralists of that period were divided into two schools of thought on the subject of divorce. Those belonging to the school of Hillel considered divorce possible on a number of different grounds: a spoilt meal, the finding of a prettier woman, etc. The opponents of this liberal school were the disciples of Shammai, who permitted divorce only in the case of the wife’s misconduct or adultery. The Pharisees who questions Jesus seem to belong to the stricter school of Shammai. The form of their question has the appearance of a trap intended to find our whether Jesus belongs to their school of thought of whether he holds liberal views on morals…On this occasion they cleverly ask Jesus, as if to oblige him to take up a position which they expect ot be that of Hillel, “Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?”




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 4-6: “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’ and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’? So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”




[Notes]
Verses 4-6: “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’ and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’? So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 4-6
Jesus responds by pointing the Pharisees back to God’s original, natural, created order for marriage




[Notes]
Then
v.4-6
In verses 4-6, Jesus responds to their question by pointing the Pharisees back to God’s original, natural, created order for marriage
In this way, Jesus begins the institution of the vocation of marriage that will be completed by Paul in Ephesians 5
What do I mean by that? Jesus not only calls people back to monogamy, but he gives marriage a theological meaning that it did not previously have

Thurian says that “When two persons are united by marriage in God…God enters into that union, he creates it, he founds it upon himself, he insures it against breaking up”
And then in Ephesians 5, Paul makes clear that Christian marriage is a symbol of the unity of Christ and the Church, so, as Thurian says
“If Christians husbands and wives do not live in this love, unity and sacrifice, they make a lie of the symbol which they constitute by marriage…Therefore they cannot separate without making a lie of that symbol and damaging the witness which they should be making to Christ and the Church.”

Jesus is making clear: marriage is indissoluble
Jesus is re-making marriage from merely a command based on the created order to a vocation with higher standards and a higher purpose



“When two persons are united by marriage in God, they then form but a single creature in the eyes of God, and God himself enters into that union with them…God enters into that union, he creates it, he founds it upon himself, he insures it against breaking up…Since they are united in God and by God, Christian husbands and wives cannot break their union without contradicting in practice the work of God which, in spite of everything, remains faithful to itself. The second reason for the indissolubility of marriage is given to us by St Paul. In the Epistle to the Ephesians he exhorts them as follows: ‘Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church’ (Eph 5:25). Then, quoting, like Jesus, the text from Genesis on which he bases the ‘mystery’ of marriage, he writes: ‘For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the Church’ (Eph. 5:31-2)…Christian marriage is a symbol of the unity of Christ and the Church, of their love and mutual sacrifice; so it should always be growing more concretely and visibly into what it really is in its depths…If Christians husbands and wives do not live in this love, unity and sacrifice, they make a lie of the symbol which they constitute by marriage…Therefore they cannot separate without making a lie of that symbol and damaging the witness which they should be making to Christ and the Church."
God unites and participates in that unification
God makes it and ensures it will not break
therefore indissouable
plus christian marriage is a symbol of trinity and Crhsit+Church, so dissoultion would falsely communicate unfaithfullness of God





Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 7-9: “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?” Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.” 




[Notes]
Verses 7-9: “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?” Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.” 




Matthew 19: 1-12
“…except for sexual immorality…” (9)
Jesus rejected the School of Shammai
Neither Mark nor Luke include it
Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11 & 39 affirm the indissolubility of marriage unconditionally
Matthew 5:32 communicates that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception






[Notes]
the Pharisees ask Jesus a followup question inviting him to take their side: the school of Shammai
but he rejects even that, saying that Moses gave them over to their broken desires
that divorce was not God’s created intention
He says that anyone who divorces his wife and marries another is committing adultery
But there’s this exception clause in Matthew that isn’t found in the other gospels
We won’t spend too much time here
But there’s good reason to believe that Jesus didn’t mean that sexual immorality was grounds for divorce, but instead allowed for a separation without remarriage
Here’s why

(1)
Thurian says that if Jesus was allowing divorce on the grounds of adultery, he would be siding with the Pharisees. And that would contradict his reference to Genesis about the indissolubility of marriage. And his disciples’ reaction, which we will get to in a second, is one of shock. They would not have been surprised if they understood Jesus to be siding with the Pharisees. But they would be shocked if Jesus was going even further than the Pharisees.

“If the Matthaenan traditional allowed this exception to the indissolubility of marriage, we should have to admit that Jesus let himself become a supporter of the school of Shammai which permitted divorce only for misconduct. Jesus would seem to contradict himself; since he placed himself about the rival schools of Hillel and Shammai in reverting to the point of view of Genesis (‘one flesh’), it would be strange if he should take sides on the matter, even the stricter side. Besides, the disciples ingenuous reaction, which we shall study later…shows that they understood Jesus’ teaching in an absolute sense and not just in Shammai’s sense, which would not have astonished them.” pg 26
If exception allows for divorce in case of adultery, he would be supporting the school of Shammai
first, this would contradict he reference of Genesis and the indissoubility of marriage
but disciples reactions suggest they understood he was not supporting Shammai but instead making a more absolute statement
they would have been comfortable with Shammai and seen it as reasonable and normal

(2)
neither Mark or Luke include exception

(3)
Rom 7:2-3, 1 Cor 7:39, and 1 Cor 7:10-11 seem to affirm the indissolubility of marriage quite unconditionally

(4)
Matt 5:32 says that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception
seems to confirm that marriage is indissoluble

So if this isn’t talking about grounds for divorce, what is it talking about?
Consistent explanation is that you can separate if there is adultery
But you cannot marry another
Because you are still married in the eyes of God



“From these different passages we can extract the following doctrine: marriage is indissoluble; whoever puts away his wife puts her in danger of becoming an adulteress and becomes guilty of her adultery; if he marries another women he commits adultery; in the case of the wife’s misconduct, the husband is not putting her in danger of adultery by putting her away, and is not the be held guilty of it, since the adultery has already been committed; but neither he nor the divorced wife may remarry without committing adultery.” pg 28




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verse 9: False marriage?
1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, and Acts 15:29 address false marriages, in which cases, you can marry someone else because you were never joined by God
Could translate instead as “except in the case of concubinage” or “except in the case of false marriage”




[Notes]
Another theory is that these exception clauses referred to false marriages
Marriage entered into under false pretenses
A marriage never consummated
Or marriage to a concubine
this seems to be what 1 Cor 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29 are talking about, and in those cases you can marry someone else because you were never truly married in the eyes of God

According to Benoit, Bonsirven, and Berrouard, One could translate the exception clause as “except in the case of concubinage” or “except in the case of a false marriage"

P. Benoit, La sainte Bible de Jerusalem, 'L’Evangile selon saint Matthieu’, Le Cerf, Paris, 1950, pp.114,55
J. Bonsirven, Le divorce dans le Nouveau Testament, Paris, 1928
M. F. Berrouard, “L’indissolubilite du mariage dans le Nouveau Testament’, Lumiere et Vie, No. 4, 1952, p.26

regardless, we need to understand how high the standard was so that we appreciate what comes next



Matthew 19: 1-12
Verse 10: The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”




[Notes]
Verse 10: The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verse 10
The disciples jokingly suggest that it would be better to stay single. Why?
Celibacy was not good or normal for the average Jew.
“If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better for us to cut off our genitals.”




[Notes]
verses 10, 11, and 12 are the most important verses in the Bible when it comes to the vocation of celibacy
the disciples are surprised by Jesus’ high standard for divorce, and they communicate that by jokingly suggesting that if that is the teaching, it would be better to stay single
why is this a joke?
In Genesis 1:27-28, God commands the Jewish people to marry and procreate
This was important, because marriage and procreation was the primary way through which God fulfilled his covenants with his people
Genesis 12-17, describes God’s covenant with Abraham and his descendants
God promises Abraham that he will have many descendants, they will will have the whole land of Canaan, they will be a great nation, and they will bless the earth
The people of Israel had to marry and procreate to fulfills these promises
So failing to follow God’s command endangered the blessing of the people of Israel 
As a result, being a eunuch or being childless was seen as a curse
Celibacy was not good or normal for the average Jew. So to suggest it would be good or normal for a Jew not to marry was laughable.
We miss this without a proper understanding of how the disciples would have heard Jesus’ teachings
to get the full effect with modern ears, perhaps you could rewrite the verse to say, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better for us to cut off our genitals.”
it’s meant to be ridiculous and facetious



Matt 19: 8-10, pg 35 (apostles amazed by Jesus’ standard, return to created order, divorce)
“The apostles, accustomed, at most, to the relative strictness of Shammai, who permitted divorce for misconduct, and remarriage, are amazed at the absolute nature of the indissolubility of marriage. Marriage seems to them to require a vow which is onerous because of its irrevocability. Marriage was made easier by the ordinances of Moses which allowed for ‘the hardness of man’s heart’ and permitted divorce, and by the moral schools of Hillel and Shammai which interpreted these ordinances…Jesus’ position, founded on the original order of creation, concerning the indissolubility of the marital union and the remarriage of divorced persons, makes marriage a permanent and exclusive undertaking, a sort of lifelong vow. A man may not divorce his wife; he may finally separate from her because of adultery, but he may not remarry during her lifetime.”



Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 11-12: Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”




[Notes]
Verses 11-12: Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”




Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 11-12
Jesus’ response shocks them: He told a crowd of Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate that they should consider celibacy.




[Notes]
it’s important to understand what verse 10 means for verses 11 and 12 to really sink in
in contrast to the disciples statement
Jesus shocks them
here’s my paraphrase: Jesus says, “Yeah, actually, some of you have been called to celibacy, and it would be better for you not to marry.”
This is radical. He told a crowd Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate to consider celibacy.



Matthew 19: 1-12
Verses 11-12
Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
A vocation that is given/called
A vocation with practical and theological purposes
A vocation that is permanent




[Notes]
there’s a lot going on in verses 11 and 12
Jesus is instituting a vocation of celibacy
it is a vocation in response to a calling and a gift
it is a vocation with both practical and theological purposes
and it is a permanent vocation



Matthew 19: 1-12
1. Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
His life of celibacy is the foundation
His words begin instituting the vocation of celibacy and made it common/normative
His death and resurrection completed the creation of the vocation
His life, words, and resurrection fulfill the promises to the eunuch





[Notes]
Wish the bible was a textbook or Jesus set up a press conf
it would make clearer to us that this is an important theological moment
this is about as close as we get
He just began instituting the vocation of marriage by calling God’s people out of our broken natural state to our redeemed state and giving theological purpose to marriage
And now he will do the same with celibacy
To the audience's shock
Here’s how he does it:
Jesus’ life of celibacy is the foundation
Jesus’ words begin instituting the vocation of celibacy and made it common/normative
Jesus’ death and resurrection complete the creation of the vocation
And by that he fulfills the promises to the eunuch

let’s dive into some of those claims



Matthew 19: 1-12
1. Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
A. His life of celibacy is the foundation




[Notes]
Jesus’ life of celibacy is the foundation
Jesus himself was celibate. He did not marry or have sex or have children. He was not romantic with anyone. So without saying a word, Jesus is challenging the commandment for all to marry and procreate and hinting at a new order. It’s not an accident that Jesus was celibate. God specifically chose this, in part, to usher in the new vocation of celibacy


pg 49
“Christ did not experience marriage, physical love and sexual union. His life is therefore the valid foundation of the vocation of celibacy in the new ear…He does not abolish the order of creation, the laws of nature and the law of Moses; he fulfills them all, giving back to these primitive systems their original profound meaning.”



Matthew 19: 1-12
1. Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
B. His words begin instituting the vocation of celibacy and made it common/normative

Jesus lifted up celibacy from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian.




[Notes]
Jesus’ words begin instituting the vocation of celibacy and made it common/normative

Remember how the Jewish people were commanded to marry and procreate? So to suggest it would be good or normal for a Jew not to marry was laughable? How does he respond to the disciple’s joking, facetious suggestion? He told a crowd Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate to consider celibacy.
That’s a huge deal. Jesus is instituting a new vocation, to stand next to marriage as an equal. Jesus placed the vocation of celibacy on equal footing.
Jesus lifted up celibacy from being an exceptional vocation for only a few to an equally normative calling for the average Christian.

In response to Matthew 19:11-12 and Christ’s institution of the vocation of celibacy, Karl Barth shares a warning for Protestants: “In repudiating this way of celibacy, or allowing it only as an exception, would not one be falling back wrongly into a conception peculiar to the Old Testament?”
He is warning that if we discourage celibacy, fail to offer it full-throatedly to the average Christian, or dismiss it an an exceptional, abnormal calling—as Calvin and Luther did–we are disregarding Christ’s words here.



Thurian pg 51 (celibacy is a fully human and Christian experience because Jesus did it)
“To remain celibate for the kingdom of heaven’s sake is not to be less human, but to know life; in giving up one form of human existence the Christian finds fulness of life. Christ was no less human because he had no other love than that of his brothers and no other bride than the Church.”

goes further about being normative
(Barth, 160, equally normative and should be common) pg 52
“Is it surprising that among Jesus’ circle, in the early Church, and later as well, there were men, it seems, who thought it good to avail themselves of this other possibility [i.e. of the second vocation, which is celibacy]; men for whom entry into the Church and life within it obviously replaced entry into the marital union and married life? They did this, not in opposition to marriage understood in the sense of Eph 5:31—marriage which had been given a new value—but rather in consequence of this new valuation of marriage, in direct connection with the example given by Jesus himself. In repudiating this way of celibacy, or allowing it only as an exception, would not one be falling back wrongly into a conception peculiar to the Old Testament?”



Matthew 19: 1-12
1.Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
C. His death and resurrection completed the creation of the vocation

Christ’s death establishes a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises because we join God’s family by Christ’s work on the cross.




[Notes]
Jesus’ death and resurrection complete the creation of the vocation
But how can he do that? Just ignore the commandment to marry and procreate?
In John 1:13 and John 3:5-7 Jesus foreshadows a new covenant where you do not belong to Israel according to the flesh but become a child of God through new birth
Colossians 1: 6 and 10 confirm that the fruit we are commanded to bear in light of Christ’s resurrection is not physical children but spiritual children
Hebrews 8 reflects that Christ’s death establishes a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises because we join God’s family by Christ’s work on the cross, not birth into a Jewish family. So the commandment for all to marry and procreate has been fulfilled. Marriage and procreation are still good, but they are no longer commanded for all.
So it’s not just Jesus’ words, but his death and resurrection that establish the new covenant that institute this new vocation: that make it possible.

This is why we can’t get stuck in Old Testament ways of thinking about marriage or celibacy
Jesus completely transforms both
In the Garden, created order, perfect, but not complete
then broken by the fall
romance, sex, and polygamy are natural
faithful monogamy and celibacy are unnatural
then Jesus institutes the vocations of marriage and celibacy
giving both theological meaning they didn’t previously have—both being images of the Trinity and Christ+Church
calling back to monogamy
lifting up celibacy




Matthew 19: 1-12
1. Jesus institutes the vocation of celibacy
D. His life, words, and resurrection fulfill the promises to the eunuch

Isaiah 56:3-5 promises eunuchs, a people who will have no spouse or biological offspring and whose lot was seen as a curse by the Jewish people, that if they fully commit themselves to the work of God, God will give them greater honor, family, and legacy than any offspring could provide. 




[Notes]
And by that he fulfills the promises to the eunuch

While Jesus is talking about a vocation of lifetime singleness, he compares the celibate to the eunuch. We’ll get more into what that means for the vocation of celibacy, but at the very least, it connects whatever is going on here with singleness to eunuchs in some way.
But, it’s hard not to read this passage as Jesus speaking to the eunuch and saying, “In this way, I have fulfilled my promises in Isaiah 56.” Isaiah 56:3-5 promises eunuchs, a people who will have no spouse or biological offspring and whose lot was seen as a curse by the Jewish people, that if they fully commit themselves to the work of God, God will give them greater honor, family, and legacy than any offspring could provide. And in Matthew 19:3-12, Jesus is promising celibate Christians, a people who will have no spouse or biological offspring and whose lot was seen as a curse by the Jewish people, that if they fully commit themselves to the work of God, God will give them deeper family and greater kingdom purpose.



Matthew 19: 1-12
2. The vocations of marriage and celibacy are called/given

Verse 11 – An ability to accept Jesus’ teachings about marriage and follow them is given to those who are called to marriage

Verse 12 – An ability to accept Jesus’ teachings about celibacy and follow them is given to those who are called to celibacy




[Notes]
In verse 11, in response to the disciples shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage
And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of celibacy has been given will accept his teachings about celibacy

Both Barth and Thurian believe Jesus is instituting the vocations of marriage and celibacy in this passage, and he is clearly communicating that our vocation is called, not chosen

Karl Barth p 158-9 Church Dogmatics (pg 41-42), two vocations
“But now, from this moment, marriage is just one possibility which one may choose, one way that can be taken…Precisely because marriage is no longer an obligation in the Church of the New Testament period, the unmarried state is not a subject for shame or grief. On the contrary—and this is the other, positive aspect—when marriage received this new meaning and consecration, then it also became possible to understand and to value the renunciation of marriage as a possibility, a way, a matter of a particular gift and call.”

Even Calvin recognizes that this gift is given, and anyone could receive that gift
Calvin commentary on Matt 19:11, vol 1, pp 389-90     pg 57
“Christ shows that not all have the liberty to choose as they think fit, for the gift of continence is a special gift…Hence this way of making oneself a eunuch does not depend on the will of a man, but the plain meaning is that there are certain people naturally capable of marrying who, nevertheless, by abstaining from marriage do not tempt God, because he allows them to do without it and grants them a privilege above others.”
not chosen but given
everyone has innate capacity to do marriage well
God give portion to do celibacy well

Barth, too, says that we are not predisposed, by nature, to either marriage or celibacy



Karl Barth p 205 marriage not only natural vocation, Matt 19, pg 58
“One marries, one enters into the state of marriage because one has realized that this is the particular will of God in one’s case, and for this reason one has the right and duty to do so. Therefore one was also ready to realize that the will of God could have been different. It is by realizing that the will of God for oneself was not celibacy that one was led to undertake marriage. So one is free; but one is not free with respect to that permission and obligation by nature, by birth, by any normal means, by one’s own initiative; one is made free by vocation, the gift and the grace of God.”
God calls us to marriage or celibacy
it is our duty to say yes
no natural predisposition for one or the other
and our preference does not matter




Matthew 19: 1-12
2. The vocations of marriage and celibacy are called/given…but are they natural?

Romance, sex, and polygamy are natural. We each have the same inherent capacity for marriage and celibacy, but an incomplete capacity.




[Notes]
This brings up the question of what is natural? Only marriage? Marriage and celibacy? Neither? Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in celibacy? No. But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either. In light of the fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural. That’s why Jesus creates the vocations of celibacy and marriage—to call people back to the order in the Garden and the order that will be in the NHNE.

(Thurian, marriage is unnatural)
pg 43
“Free marriage or polygamy is indeed part of the natural order; but marriage as ordained by Christ, who re-establishes in a world of sin the marital order existing before the Fall, demands a vocation, obedience, and sacrifice.”
“Only those who understand the saying of Christ who realize the demands and who feel called to it should respond to this vocation of Christian marriage which is exclusive and indissoluble.”
Thurian affirms this, and he has strong words for what happens when we mistakenly think marriage is the only natural vocation (next page)




Matthew 19: 1-12
“…When the call to celibacy is too little heard, marriage gradually come to be thought of as a reality of the purely natural order…When the vocation of celibacy is undervalued, so is that of marriage…”




[Notes]
(Thurian, balance between marriage and celibacy, consequences for low view of celibacy) pg 44
Both bring difficulties, renunciations and sacrifices, as well as blessings and joys. When the call to celibacy is too little heard, marriage gradually come to be thought of as a reality of the purely natural order. ‘Every man, every Christian, ought to be married, and if he is not, it is by accident or through selfishness!’ When the vocation of celibacy is undervalued, so is that of marriage, When there is only one natural way to open to men, one cannot speak of vocation. For there to be a vocation, there must be the possibility of a choice between at least two ways. In order that Christian marriage may be considered as a holy vocation and not just as a reality in the natural order to be blessed and sanctified, the call to religious celibacy for the kingdom of heaven’s sake must be sounded”

Basically saying that there can’t only be one vocation. There either a default for all, or at least 2 vocations

the word “chosen” has been used a couple of times, but also called and given
those seem contradictory
let’s break that down
voluntary, chosen eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven
don’t let these words fool you
this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our preference
that we only have to be celibate or single if we want to
clear that God has a call for us
and that we should obey God’s call
but God wishes for our preference to be conformed to God’s preference
and for no one to be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call
this should be a clear admonishment of mandatory priestly celibacy




Matthew 19: 1-12
3. The practical and theological purposes of the vocation of celibacy

Practical: to fully commit oneself to kingdom work

Theological: the creation of the vocation of celibacy creates the space for marriage to change from being ordinary to being for a specific theological purpose




[Notes]
On screen



Jesus describes the practical purposes of the vocation of celibacy

Matt 19 for the kingdom’s sake, practical purposes, pg 107
“It is this that Christ meant when he founded the state of voluntary celibacy ‘for the kingdom of heaven’s sake’…Like Jesus, the Christian celibate can commit the whole of himself spiritually and humanly to the ministry. He is not celibate in order to achieve greater tranquility, but in order to be like Christ in his work for the kingdom. If he means to live truly in his way of life, all his strength and all his cares should be directed towards a living proclamation of the Gospel in order to hasten the return of Christ. He should be ready to respond to the calls of the Church and of his community with obedience and availability.”
wholly committed to kingdom work

Jesus describes the theological purposes of the vocation of celibacy

(…, Thurian, discernment, equal states, theological purposes)
“Similarly, the existence of the state of celibacy and the state of marriage side by side in the Church sets forth the dialogue which is essential for the prophesying of the kingdom. If the celibate life is not available as a possible choice for the servants of God, then marriage becomes the normal and ordinary life for all. But in the new order fo the kingdom nothing is normal or ordinary any longer. The secularization of marriage is a result of our having forgotten that a choice between two possible courses is open to the Christian before he makes his decision.”



Matthew 19: 1-12
4. The vocation of celibacy is permanent

Jesus describes the celibate as a “eunuch for the sake of the kingdom” to communicate its permanence




[Notes]
Jesus comparing the celibate for the sake of the kingdom to a eunuch is not an accident. It’s meaningful: being a eunuch is permanent and irrevocable—you can’t undo genital mutilation. So too, the vocation of celibacy should be permanent.

Matt 19, permanent and free state, pg 55
“Does not the mention by Jesus of the first two classes of eunuchs (by birth and by accident) indicate that he means to speak of a permanent state when he institutes voluntary celibacy?…However if Christ uses the word eunuch even for that class of Christians, there must be a reason for it. And what other reason can there be to justify Jesus’ use of the same word to describe eunuchs by birth or accident and celibates for the sake of the kingdom than that he wishes to point out the permanent nature of that state?”

St. Athenagoras from 177 AD and Thurian agree here, closing his argument with this:
Matt 19, permanent, pg 55-56
“We cannot otherwise understand why the Lord should see fit to scandalize the Jews and shock them by a word which revolted them and which had the literal meaning of a condition incompatible with membership of the people of Israel or of the liturgical assembly.”

Barth agrees as well, stating that accepting the call to celibacy not only involves the temporary abstention from romance and sex but a permanent forbiddance from marrying

Karl Barth pg 160, permanence, speaking on Matthew 19, pg 56
“This is not a prohibition or discrimination, but rather a precise delimitation and relativization of marriage. Nor is there a particular institutional implication of the status of a celibate in these words; instead they define actual decisions to celibacy. Above all, there is no question of celibates having a higher status, but it is clearly stated that there are special circumstances which make such decisions possible or indispensable. The result is not only that marriage is not commanded to certain men, but also that it is forbidden to them temporarily or permanently. In the light of these words, we cannot assert on the other hand that marriage is generally and for each person the highest way and the best solution. They simply imply that the new era can now impel man to remain celibate in order to witness in this way to the relationship which exists between Christ and his Church.”
Decision of celibacy leading to marriage being forbidden permanently

Matt 19:12, celibacy permanent, pg 94
“When Christs speaks of voluntary celibates for the kingdom of heaven’s sake, he uses imagery which leaves us in no doubt about the character of absolute and permanent renunciation of all possibility of marriage. The voluntary celibates for the kingdom of heaven’s sake are compared with those who must of necessity remain unmarried.”

(St. Athenagoras, AD 177, celibacy is voluntary, permanent, and beautiful) pg 53
“There are to be found among us many men and women who have grown old without marrying, in the hope of belonging more completely to God. If perseverance in virginity and voluntary celibacy brings us near to God, and if the mere thought, the mere desire of pleasure take us away from him, how much more should we avoid the acts from whose very thought we flee.”
MANY!
and word for voluntary celibacy is greek word that communicates an absolute and permanent state

Now some might balk at the permanence of celibacy, saying that limits God. But Thurian has a convincing response. 
(Thurian, permanent vow of celibacy)
pg 36
combatting idea that permanent vow of celibacy limits God
“A permanent pledge of poverty, chastity, and obedience seems to the ordinary Protestant to be interference with the liberty of the Holy Spirit. Let us say at once that it is the permanent pledge of celibacy which raises the most questions, together with the lifelong membership of a particular spiritual family, a single community. ‘Suppose you are unable to persevere in celibacy?’ one is asked. Or again, ‘Suppose God guides you to marry, or calls you to a quite different field of service which necessitates your leaving the community?’ The answer to these questions will be left until later, but they are mentioned here to show that they can be turned against marriage and the lifelong vow which it involves. Although Reformed thinking calls in question lifelong monastic vows or permanent commitment to a community, it generally admits the irrevocability of Christian marriage, with an exception in the case of adultery, which for some authorizes separation without remarriage, and for many, divorce and remarriage. It occurs to nobody to think that our belief in the liberty of God is harmed by this permanent marriage vow. Let us ask the above questions again, referring them to marriage. ‘Suppose the woman you have married loses the charm that first made you choose her and love her; suppose you fall in love with another woman; suppose your wife’s mental condition necessitates a certain continence; suppose your wife is afflicted with neurasthenia or madness; will you break the marriage bond which binds you to your wife for better for worse, in sickness and in health?’ Or again, ‘Suppose God calls you to a task which will take you to tropical countries or wretched living conditions which your wife’s health cannot stand, will you break with her?’ Any Christian would reply ’No’ to both these questions, The permanent marriage vow unconditionally excludes divorce for any reason, except a temporary or permanent separation without remarriage, it obliges the partners always to plan together so that any step may be taken by both of them together. Marriage may then be considered a handicap, but it is a handicap willed by God, an irrevocable vow and vocation. The marriage vow does not contradict God’s liberty, it merely limits man’s freedom. The Holy Spirit has no need of our freedom to blow where he listen.”

If we can accept that marriage is permanent and irrevocable, we should be able to accept the permanence and irrevocability of celibacy

In response to the Pharisees and his disciples, Jesus institutes the vocations of marriage and celibacy and he communicates that both vocations are called by God, normative, permanent, and have unique practical and theological purposes 



Theology of Celibacy
Luke 18: 28-30
Luke 20: 34-36
1 Corinthians 7: 1-40
1 Timothy 5: 5-15




[Notes]
Some quick highlights from the other passages we can’t get to

In Luke 18, Jesus promises an 100-fold blessing of family and blessing in this life and the life to come to those who commit permanently to celibacy 

In Luke 20, we learn that All of us will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth. One of the theological purposes of celibacy is to foreshadow the next life and give the Church hope 

In 1 Cor 7, Paul confirms the teachings of Jesus: there are two vocations, they are called by God, and they are permanent. Paul communicates his preference for celibacy, praises early forms of vowed, permanent celibacy, and describes the practical purposes of celibacy: freedom from raising children to do more demanding kingdom work 

And in 1 Tim 5, Paul reaffirms his high view of vowed celibacy and communicates that breaking that vow is a sin



Theology of Celibacy
A vocation of equal theological and practical beauty that involves renouncing romance, marriage, and sex for the purposes of greater kingdom work and special theological beauty. It is still a call to intimacy in the context of family. It is vowed and permanent. Everyone should submit this question to God, and our vocation is given/called. Everyone has the same capacity for marriage or celibacy, and celibacy is just as normative.






Supporting Celibacy



Teach it
Model it
Discern it
Support it
Celebrate it

[Notes]
How many of you grew up hearing that in church?

So to take what the Bible has to say about celibacy seriously, we have to teach it

Model it
Discern it (we’ll come back to it)
Support it (monastery)
Celebrate it



DISCERN


[Notes]
Third, Christians need to invite all Christians to open-handedly submit the question of Christian marriage or vocational singleness to God




Everyone should discern



Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or celibacy—is called and given, not chosen



[Notes]
As we’ve already mentioned, Scripture teaches that we should all be offering this question to God
Scripture makes clear that our relational vocation—marriage or celibacy—is called and given, not chosen
Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of celibacy has been given will accept his teachings about celibacy.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or celibacy, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to celibacy—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to celibacy. God has called others to marriage.



But…



A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficult being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and celibacy. 

[Notes]
now you might balk
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to celibacy are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And marriage and celibacy are actually equally natural
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in celibacy? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both celibacy and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should all discern which God has called us to





How to Discern



Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of what you might be called to
Consider your pastor and current circumstances
Seek support from your church

[Notes]
so what does it look like to ask God this question
to give God a chance
to discern?

Here’s 5 suggestions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or celibacy, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both celibacy and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward celibacy or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to celibacy

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to a vocation of celibacy?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to lifetime singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.



=


Share



What next steps to you want to take to begin discerning whether God has called you to a vocation of marriage or a vocation of celibacy?

