

of
Pieter Valk

[Notes]
Hello, I am Pieter Valk

I studied at Vanderbilt University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Lipscomb University
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and one day a week I meet with LGBT+ undergraduate students at a Christian university navigating questions of faith, sexuality, and identity

And the rest of the week, I’m the Executive Director of EQUIP
A team of missionary consultants committed to equipping the Church with the understanding and skills to better love and serve those who experience same-sex attraction
Or to put it another way
We partner with churches to help them become places where LGBT+ people can belong and thrive according to an orthodox Christian sexual ethic

There’s a reason why both of my jobs focus on the intersection of faith and sexuality: I am a Christian. I am gay. And I believe that God calls all Christians to celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.

So I want to share with you more about my story, how I steward that and why, and how the Church can become a better place for gay people

But first, I want to make a quick note about terminology. I’m going to be using the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex, whether they be gay, lesbian, or bisexual. I don’t mean to communicate anything about their theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out by using that word. It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”. There’s a whole bigger conversation to be had about what words Christians should use to describe themselves. But for now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.



MY STORY


[Notes]
In 6th grade, I realized I was gay , and I swore I would never let anyone know who I really was because I was ashamed, afraid, and alone. But I desired to be known and loved by God and the people around me.
I grew up hearing that being gay was bad, dirty, and disgusting.
When a gay person came on TV or was seen in public, people commented how gross gay marriage was and how godless gay people were.
If the topic ever came up in my community, it was a simple statement that God was against homosexuality.
So when I realized that I was gay, it's no surprise that I thought I was bad, dirty, and disgusting. I believed I must have done something wrong to deserve this.
So I tried to make a deal with God.
I promised Him that I would read my Bible every day for six months if He would make me straight.
I held up my end of the bargain, but God didn’t.
I promised I would obey my parents without fail. No change.
I stopped playing video games. Still gay.
Time and time again I begged God to heal me if being gay wasn’t how I was supposed to be, and time and time again change didn't seem to be His will.
I was ashamed. And I was also afraid.
And I was afraid of anyone finding out. I was afraid they would reject me
In middle school I played leading roles in both of our theater productions, but in high school I quickly realized that the same people in the theater club where also in our Gay-Straight Alliance. I could not risk anyone suspecting that I was gay. No more theater for Pieter.
Gay marriage was a particularly contentious topic during the 2008 election, so naturally, our government class played out the same divisive conversations found on CNN. Unintentionally fulfilling stereotypes, I was one of the most ardent opponents of gay marriage—thinking that perhaps that would throw people off my trail. I remember a female classmate turning around in her chair to berate me for being a bigot. Then she said with omniscience, “I bet you’re secretly gay and one day you’re going to come out. You’re just so homophobic because you don’t want anyone to know who you are.” I was terrified.
I am most ashamed of these moments where my fear of being outed and disgust of my homosexuality turned to homophobia that hurt others. I’m haunted by a scene from high school cross country. Derek was the only openly gay guy in our school and he was on the team. As we waited at the starting line for a race to begin, everyone paired up for partner stretching. But one by one as Derek asked the other guys to help him stretch, he was turned away with “No. Gross! I don’t want to touch you and I don’t want you touching me!” Then he got to me and I (sheepishly) refused. I dished out the same pain I had spent tears and prayers to soothe.
I was ashamed. I was afraid. And I was alone. I thought there was no one else like me. I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people: that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God. Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people. But on the other side, all of the followers of Jesus I knew were straight, and I was led to believe that in order to be a good follower of Jesus, you had to be straight. And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere. I was alone.
It was in this loneliness that a desire to be known and loved grew.
When I started to share my story with others, it was a mixed bag
One night during sophomore year of high school, I lay on my bed listening to Come to Jesus by Chris Rice on repeat. I didn’t know if I could trust anyone, but I couldn’t handle being alone and ashamed anymore. I finally mustered the courage, walked downstairs, and told my parents. They didn’t know how to help me any more than I did, but it was still a great relief: I wasn't all alone with my secret anymore.
Toward the end of high school I shared my story with my youth pastor. One night during a youth conference weekend, our youth pastor gave a devotion about shame and encouraged each of us to talk to an adult leader about our deepest secret. But when I shared my deepest secret, he was silent. After a string of meaningless Christian cliches, he sent me away.
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry. I followed every instruction of my mentor, led studies of Jesus' Scriptures and teachings, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts. I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired. And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus ministry or at any university. The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year of college after a gay brother was kicked out of our Christian fraternity, I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity. I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed gay brothers to know that they weren’t alone. My fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better. These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' Scriptures and teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
That motivated me to do something to change that
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping communities learn how to better love gay people like me
that was over 7 years ago
since then I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
and I started EQUIP with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a biblical sexual ethic



WHAT + WHY?


[Notes]
You’ve heard me use that phrase “biblical sexual ethic” a couple of time. You’re probably wondering what that means and how I understand God thinks about this topic.
Let me take a moment to speak carefully about how I think God has invited each of us to steward our sexualities
because while I still hold on to many of the core beliefs I heard growing up, I now hold them in a more nuanced way



My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not how God first imagined me. It is a brokenness, a result of the Fall, but it is not a sin.

We do not choose who we are attracted to.

There is no formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction, me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay, is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. Of all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world to bend and break. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, he would have expected me to be gay
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold against me my involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls
I do not believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight
The consensus of scientist is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation



My Beliefs



God calls all Christians to either a vocation of abstinent singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.

There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.

[Notes]
What does Jesus' Scriptures and teachings have to say about all of this? Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of followers of Jesus have understood Jesus' Scriptures and teachings for 2,000 years, God calls all followers of Jesus to celibacy--to refrain from sexual and romantic activity--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins
For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I want, I started asking God about 5 years ago what He wants
would He rather I get married or commit to celibacy
And about 3 years ago I felt strongly that God was calling me to celibacy
But no one can live life alone, so I’ve been exploring the possibility of starting an intentional Christian community with other men who feel called to celibacy, a monastery, you might say, where we can find committed family



But why?



Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7 speak of a committed celibacy where the Christian gives up marriage and sex to do different kingdom work.

Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5 speak of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy and raising children.

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”
I’m not going to get into those. I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are
No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for followers of Jesus: celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed celibacy where one gives up romance and marriage and sex and children to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel
you see, the follower of Jesus should not approach God or Jesus' Scriptures and teachings with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how followers of Jesus should steward their sexuality is clear: celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best



But why?



I can’t get past the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my own life and the lives of others

[Notes]
but even if I wasn’t convinced logically of a biblical sexual ethic, I couldn’t ignore the evidence I see in my own life and the lives of others that a progressive sexual ethic isn’t God’s best
I couldn’t ignore the bad fruit of in my life and the lives of others of believe that God blesses same-sex Christian marriages in the same way He blessed opposite-sex Christian marriages
At a 30,000 foot level, the average adult same-sex partnership lasts much shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
And the rates of adultery and infidelity are much higher in same-sex marriages
Now we can argue whether this is the result of societal oppression, the bad fruit of not following God’s design, or both
But for me, what’s much more convincing is that most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobatics to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that Jesus' Scriptures and teachings probably say what we’ve thought it has said for 2000 years
so they get to a place where they don’t believe Jesus' Scriptures and teachings are authoritative or binding for modern people
but once they get to a place where Jesus' Scriptures and teachings and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?
and listen, I don’t want that for my gay friends
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic in the lives of my gay friends is losing their faith
The bad fruit of my own experiences has has also been convincing
Satan told me for years that if I just had a romantic relationship with a man, everything would be better
I’d finally have everything I needed
And I wish I could have just trusted God that Satan’s lies were lies
but I couldn’t
I had to test them for myself
And my own experience has been that romantic relationships with men were not everything I hoped they would be
they were painful
they were not as good as promised
and while I haven’t experienced everything under the Sun, so I can’t say authoritatively that I know from experience that nothing would satisfy me
one experience was just about the clearest contrast between sin and beauty that I could ask for
when I was in a particularly dark place in college, I connected romantically with another guy
and despite the fact that I was doing things that the movies told me would make me feel more connected and loved and known than anything else, I felt so alone
and then after we stopped, the reality of what we had just done rushed in
and we sat there, on the floor, leaning against the wall, shoulder to shoulder
and we started crying, both of us
mixed in with the crying we both verbalized what we were feeling
we shared how empty that felt for both of us
how lonely we felt
how messed up this world was and disconnected from God we felt
how confused we were that God would let us be this way and yet connections like we just shared didn’t feel right
and you know what, I didn’t feel alone anymore
I didn’t feel disconnected anymore
you see, the romantic connections that Satan promised would satisfy me failed
and then in stark contrast to that, the two of us confessing to each other and crying out to God satisfied us and felt more beautifully intimate than anything we shared before
So no, even if I could convince myself logically of a progressive sexual ethic, I couldn’t get past all of the bad fruit I have seen
But, admittedly, there’s bad fruit of a biblical sexual ethic too



But wait…



There’s bad fruit of a biblical sexual ethic too.

The solution: Churches must learn to better embody a biblical sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people.



[Notes]
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a biblical sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians: churches don’t know how to love us well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either
And that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God
why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings
So I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a biblical sexual ethic, because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
no, I think the solution is for churches to learn how to better embody a biblical sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people

And that is exactly what EQUIP does
EQUIP partners with churches to help them become places where LGBT+ people can belong and thrive according to a biblical sexual ethic
What, then, does it look like for a church to become that kind of a place







Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in celibacy or Christian marriage


[Notes]
We break it down into 5 pieces
With each of these, I’m going to point out how the church is doing this poorly and how we need to do this differently

First, Most churches today lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married, teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about lifetime celibacy and divorce.
This leads to high divorce rates and a void of theology and practice of lifetime abstinent singleness among straight Christians.
But then we call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship by allowing straight Christians to misuse marriage for their romantic fulfillment while asking only gay Christians to consider celibacy.

Instead, our churches have got to become places where everyone in thinking theologically about their sexual stewardship
We need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of abstinent singleness during which we discern whether we are called to a lifetime vocation of celibacy or a lifetime vocation of Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
These churches teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of celibacy or Christian marriage to God. 

Second, churches today avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people, so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that sit the fence on this topic hurt gay Christians because their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, our churches need to become places that talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, they explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do LGBT+ people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to LGBT+ people good?
As a result, everyone in your church knows how to love LGBT+ people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, LGBT+ people in your church still in the closet will know what you believe, your love for them, and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, Most churches wait until a kid shares that he is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
On average, teens wait five years after first recognizing their same-sex attraction to talk to a parent or pastor.
That’s five years that a teen makes sense of these questions alone.
Most often, this means that a teen has either developed shame, depression, and suicidality or adopted a progressive sexual ethic (and often both).Instead, churches need to become places that talk about same-sex attraction in age-appropriate ways across the lifespan.
Before a teen realizes he or she is gay, the teen hears that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to, that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less, and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then, when teens realize they are gay, they quickly share with their parents and pastors, inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways.

Fourth, unfortunately, many parents and pastors first react to a teen sharing about his attractions by sending him to a therapist or a parachurch ministry outside of the church to “fix” him.
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay teens well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay teens is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches need to become places where pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ Christians well.
They've done what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay teens.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression, these churches recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors help gay teens integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, A lot of churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics, but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.
They are places where no one is thriving in celibacy or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
Essentially, they are walking gay teens to a desert, giving them a shovel and a bag of seeds, and then commanding them to thrive.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage, the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that celibacy is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well, and they don’t invite straight people to consider celibacy.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering celibacy to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where LGBT+ people could actually thrive in celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage.
These churches teach about the theology of celibacy in Scripture, adults are modeling thriving in lifetime singleness and they are celebrated in the church, and the church invites all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to celibacy or marriage.
Most importantly, these churches are places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find, whether that be through intentional Christian communities of celibate (or celibate and married) people or helping celibates move in with marrieds to be a part of their family.
Then, these churches teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people, cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.




QUESTIONS


[Notes]
So you’ve heard my story, you’ve heard how I steward my sexuality and why, and you’ve heard what I think the Church should do differently
I’m sure some of you have comments or questions
I’d love to leave the rest of the time for discussion

On Wednesday: I want to dive deeper into that vision for how churches should do this differently
In particular, we’re going to talk about the need to invite everyone to think theologically about stewarding their sexualities
