


Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
Vanderbilt
Gordon Conwell
Lipscomb

UCC

EQUIP
Mission (beliefs)

results
1,200 Christian leaders
14 churches, universities, and campus ministries
2,830 hours of training

vision

share story in a way that helps straight brothers empathize with challenges of SSA
I grew up rarely hearing my church talk about SSA
and when they did, it was a simple statement that God is against homosexuality

early middle school realize SSA
silence of parents and church -> make sense of this by myself

ashamed—I am not how I am supposed to be, and it is somehow my fault
alone—can someone be both gay and Christian? I must be the only one
afraid—if I tell my parents and friends, they will reject me

so prayed and read the Bible hoping God will make me straight
but after years, nothing changes

so looked around and wondered what my options were
not attracted to women romantically or sexually
certainly not in the way other guys talk about women, and that seems to be necessary for marriage to work
so getting married to a woman wasn’t an option
my beliefs told me marriage with a man wasn’t an option
so the only option left was lifelong singleness

but that prospect didn’t look good either
didn’t know anyone who has thrived as single for a lifetime
not value or taught or celebrated

eventually, told parents, friends, and pastors
some react very poorly
but some reacted well
when I was a sophomore shared my story with the entire chapter
led to deep friendships with other SSA guys and tradition of sharing at NOPAP
but at best, straight friends responded with, “wow, that must be really hard. you are so courageous. I don’t know if I can help you, but I am confident you and God will figure it out”
then they went along with their lives
got married
moved away

over time the pain of the loneliness grows into despair and hopelessness

now if I left it there, that would be the story of most SSA Christians I know
I’ve fought hard to build community
And I’ve started EQUIP to help the Church offer LGBT+ people something better
I’ve found great meaning and am working toward better intimacy with God and others

but most have not experienced the beauty I have
that is why this is a high stakes conversation
That’s why conversation about sexuality and sexual stewardship matter to me



Mere Sexuality



Agree with definition and purposes of Christian marriage
Appreciate recognition of challenges LGBT+ Christians face
But author sees celibacy as lesser, doesn’t call straight people to celibacy, and doesn’t recognize the idolatry of romance/marriage
Doesn’t call the Church to repent of being an impossible place for LGBT+ to flourish according to a traditional sexual ethic

[Notes]
Let’s start with the book you guys have been working through—here are my brief thoughts

And let’s be honest, if celibacy isn’t viable, his arguments against same-sex marriage collapse



What we believe…



If God gives people desires to marry and have kids, then He wants them to marry
Marriage is primarily about companionship and mutual fulfillment
If we get married, we only have to have kids if and when we want them
God calls a select few to celibacy and sustains them spiritually
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close

[Notes]
I want to offer an alternative
But to do that, I want to set the scene by first highlighting what I think the average American believes about sexual stewardship
What do I mean by this phrase sexual stewardship? Well, recognizing that God created all of us to be in community and with the capacity for romantic relationship, how do we make good decisions about those things across our lifespan?

Problems:
Assumption of marriage
Marriage is self-serving
Not submitting question of kids to God
No responsibility for single people in the church
Idolatry of marriage



JESUS

& SEXUALITY

[Notes]
In contrast, how should we think about sexual stewardship?
Well perhaps a good way to start is to look at what Jesus said and did when it came to his sexuality



Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage




[Notes]
Here’s what I’m going to share with you
We’ll tease these out, and then we will explore what we do with this and why is matters to us



Never Married
Jesus never married and was celibate
No direct references but taught since the Early Church
Some point to Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2




[Notes]
He never married and was celibate
This has been the understanding and teaching of the Church since the early Church
Some reference Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2 as further evidence — the Church is the bride of Christ, so he can have no other bride
A simple but important fact



Never Married
If the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish? To what extent do we need romance, marriage, and sex?



12

[Notes]
if the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish?

Should challenge us that those things aren’t necessary to flourish
But that’s what culture tells us is fulfilling
So should leave us with the question, “What is necessary for flourishing?”



Encourage Celibacy
Jesus talked about marriage and celibacy in Matthew 19:1-12
Raised the standard of commitment in marriage
Encouraged celibacy
Compared to eunuchs (voluntary and involuntary)




[Notes]
He talked about marriage and celibacy and ultimately encouraged celibacy and said that it was given, not chosen
Let’s Read Matthew 19:1-12 and then we’ll talk about what that means for us

1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan. 2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.3 Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”4 “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’[a] 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’[b]? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”7 “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”8

Classic Pharisees—they are trying to test Jesus. Either he comes out against God’s purposes for marriage or the exceptions Moses allowed.

Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. 9 I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”10

Jesus says that God’s intention was also for marriage to be lifelong and Moses only allowed divorce because he gave people over to their sin. He then raises the standard for divorce and the level of commitment one should have in marriage.

The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”11

The disciples think this is a ridiculously high standard and joke that it would be better to just stay sinlge.

Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”

And Jesus responds by saying, “No joke, it would be better for you to marry”. We will talk about this more later, but in the for the Israelites, marriage and procreation was a commandment, so for Jesus to suggest that it would be good for someone to be single for a lifetime is pretty radical. Additionally, he makes a comparison to eunuchs recognizing that some will choose long-term singleness and others will be called to it despite their personal preference.



Encourage Celibacy
Jesus encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and recognized that celibacy is given.

Most of us assume we will get married. How could this challenge the way we think about our future? Are we truly open to being called to celibacy?




25

[Notes]
We tend to think celibacy is voluntary and nice for those who choose it. But we want to get married. If instead celibacy is given, how should we think about our own calling? How should we be discerning our call? Are we willing to be celibate if God calls us to that?



A New Covenant
Christ’s sacrifice established a new covenant in Ephesians 1:3-14
Adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s sacrifice
Marriage and procreation are still good but not commandments




[Notes]
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage and procreation were no longer commandments
the promises God made to His people in the Old Testament were promises of temporal flourishing fulfilled through offspring, so procreation was a commandment
but Christ’s sacrifice establishes a new covenant: Ephesians 1:3-14
Let’s read Ephesians 1:3-14

3 Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ. 4 For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love 5 he[a] predestined us for adoption to sonship[b] through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will— 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves. 7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace 8 that he lavished on us. With all wisdom and understanding, 9 he[c] made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ, 10 to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ.11 In him we were also chosen,[d] having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will, 12 in order that we, who were the first to put our hope in Christ, might be for the praise of his glory. 13 And you also were included in Christ when you heard the message of truth, the gospel of your salvation. When you believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God’s possession—to the praise of his glory.

Previously, to be in God’s family you had to be born a Jew and maintain that relationship with God through sacrifices
But in this letter Paul is proclaiming that the Greeks in the Church in Ephesus are now in the family of God
we are adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s work on the cross
while marriage and procreation are still good, they are no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises and they are no longer commanded



A New Covenant
People of the Old Testament saw marrying and having children as a beautiful way to obey God and fulfill His promises. How can we learn to see celibacy and spiritual procreation in the same way?



34

[Notes]
People of the Old Testament saw marrying and having children as a beautiful way to obey God and fulfill His promises. How can we learn to see celibacy and spiritual procreation in the same way?

Our churches don’t talk about celibacy
They don’t celebrate celibate people
They don’t really support celibacy



A Celibate Future
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Matt 22:30 - There will be no marriage, sex, or romance in the New Heaven and New Earth (NHNE)
Christ’s life is an example of how we will live and his resurrection starts the process of realizing NHNE




[Notes]
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Christ’ resurrection begins the process of redeeming creation and bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth
NHNE is a physical place, not floating spiritual orbs
And in Matthew 22:30 Jesus says “At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.”
Christ revealed that in the New Heaven and New Earth, there will be no marriage or sex or romance
So Christ’s life of celibacy is an example of how we will live in the next life
And his resurrection put in motion the work of redeeming creation, bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth, and realizing this place where there is neither marriage nor sex



A Celibate Future
If the vocation of celibacy is a foretaste of how we will all be in the New Heaven and the New Earth, could that make it a higher calling in some ways? How should that change how we think about celibacy?



41

[Notes]
If the vocation of celibacy is a foretaste of how we will all be in the New Heaven and the New Earth, could that make it a higher calling in some ways? How should that change how we think about celibacy?

We shouldn’t see it as a curse or a lesser vocation
Perhaps even see it as a better vocation




Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage




[Notes]
So Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex, so they are not necessary for a full human life
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that celibacy was given, not chosen, so we too should discern our calling
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill his promises, so celibacy is equally good and should be celebrated
His resurrection started the work of bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth where we will all be celibate, perhaps lifting it up as a higher calling



But Wait!
Does that mean Jesus is calling us to live lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?

NO!




[Notes]
But wait, does that mean Jesus is calling us to lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?
NO!



Created for Intimacy
We were created for intimacy with God and other people
While many of you will get married, Christ redefines family to make the Body of Christ our first family (Mark 3:31-35)
Yet, we will always be lonely




[Notes]
We are created for intimacy with God and with other people
We all need connection, relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive love
We all need emotional, spiritual, and physical connection
We are all created to enjoy those in the context of family
And many of you will end up getting married and that will be a beautiful source of relationship and family
But Christ redefines that to—he calls us to see the Body of Christ as our first family (Mark 3:31-35)

31 Then Jesus’ mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent someone in to call him. 32 A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.”
33 “Who are my mother and my brothers?” he asked.
34 Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, “Here are my mother and my brothers! 35 Whoever does God’s will is my brother and sister and mother.”

Jesus is hanging out with the disciples and others learning from him
Mother and brother ask him to come outside
Basically, “Hey, we’re you’re family, we’re you’re first priority, come outside”
And he rejects that idea that his biological family is his first priority
Instead, he says that the family of God, other Christians, are his first family and his first priority

So yes we are created for intimacy with God and other people, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that that will be fulfilled in a biological family
We can find that same family in relationship with other Christians

Yet, we also need to recognize that because this world is broken, we will always be lonely. Even if we end up getting married and we have a great relationship with God

Tomorrow I’ll share at little bit more about what celibacy looks like in practice, how the church can help all people—gay or straight—thrive in celibacy, and then the implications of all of this on LGBT+ people



My Challenge to You
Do you really think sexual and romantic fulfillment are necessary to be fully human?
Do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
If not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?




[Notes]
So what I want to leave you with is this:
regardless of whether you are a Christian or not
I challenge you to consider the modern narrative about sexual and romantic fulfillment
do you really think those are necessary to be fully human?
do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
And if not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?
