


GOD’S GOOD



GAY PEOPLE

for



God’s Good
for Gay People



Is the gospel great news for gay people?

[Notes]
Is the gospel great news for gay people? Or, let’s lower the bar. Is the gospel at least good news for gay people?
It doesn’t seem like it.
Too often, churches seem to teach that the God of the Bible is not for gay people. That God hates gay people. At best, churches are silent.
Then friends with a more progressive sexual sexual tell the same story but in a different way. They say that the Bible—or at least how we’re read the Bible for the past 2,000 years—is bad news for gay people.
Our churches and our friends would lead us to believe that God’s teachings are bad news for sexual minorities.
 
And for good reason.



God’s Good
for Gay People



22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US
19.3 million (86%) grew up in church
10.4 million (54%) have left the faith


[Notes]
In the most extensive study of LGBT+ people and the Church, Andrew Marin’s Us Versus Us reveals that of the 22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US, 19.3 million (86%) grew up in church. Of those, 10.4 million LGBT+ people have left the faith—that’s 54% of LGBT+ people who grew up in the Church.



God’s Good
for Gay People



Gay teens are 5x more likely to attempt suicide
Religious LGBT+ youth are 38% more likely to be suicidal
Gay teens from highly rejecting families are 8.4x more likely to attempt suicide

[Notes]
Why? Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their peers. LGBT+ youth who say religion is important to them are 38% more likely to be suicidal than their non-religious LGBT+ peers, suggesting that homophobic religious beliefs increase teens’ vulnerability to depression. And gay teens who come from highly rejecting families are 8.4 times more likely to attempt suicide than other gay teens.



God’s Good
for Gay People



Hate crimes are committed against LGBT+ people every day
73% of LGBT+ people view evangelical churches as unfriends


[Notes]
Hate crimes are committed against LGBT people every day. And according to the Pew Research Center, 73% of LGBT people view evangelical churches as unfriendly.



God’s Good
for Gay People



How has God invited all Christians to steward their sexualities?
How have Christians failed to offer gay people those best things?
How can Christians better love the gay people in our lives?

[Notes]
But what if God actually wants to offer the best things to gay people? What if our churches have done a poor job of offering what God wants to offer, but God’s wisdom is actually very good news for gay people?

Today I want to explore those questions. We will explore how God has invited all Christians to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways. I’ll highlight how those teachings are inconvenient but ultimately life-giving for all people—gay or straight. Then, we will recognize how Christians have often failed to offer to gay people those best things God wants to offer, and we’ll consider how we can better love the gay people in our lives.



of
Pieter Valk

[Notes]
But before we do that, I want to share a little bit about myself and how God has redeemed this brokenness in my life for my good and His glory. I studied at Vanderbilt University, Lipscomb University, and Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary. One day a week I’m a licensed professional counselor who meets with gay people trying to make sense of their faith and sexuality. The rest of the week, I lead an organization called EQUIP. We’re a team of missionary consultants that help churches become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic. 
 
There’s a reason why both of my jobs focus on the intersection of faith and sexuality: I am a Christian. I am gay. And I believe that God calls all Christians to celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.

I just called myself gay. I want to make a quick note about terminology. I’m going to be using the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex, whether they be gay, lesbian, or bisexual. I don’t mean to communicate anything about their theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out by using that word. It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”. And I’ll use the phrase “gay Christian” to refer to people who are Christians and experience same-sex attraction. I use that phrase to describe myself because that’s the term that I’m most comfortable with. But not everyone uses that phrase, and Christians I respect prefer to use different language. There is healthy discussion Christians can have about that disagreement. For now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.

So, in 6th grade, I realized I was gay, and I swore I would never let anyone know who I really was because I was ashamed, afraid, and alone. But I desired to be known and loved by God and the people around me.
 
I grew up hearing that being gay was bad, dirty, and disgusting.
When a gay person came on TV or was seen in public, people commented how gross gay marriage was and how godless gay people were.
If the topic ever came up in my church, it was a simple statement that God was against homosexuality.
So when I realized that I was gay, it's no surprise that I thought I was bad, dirty, and disgusting. I believed I must have done something wrong to deserve this.
 
So I tried to make a deal with God.
I promised Him that I would read my Bible every day for six months if He would make me straight.
I held up my end of the bargain, but God didn’t.
I promised I would obey my parents without fail. No change.
I stopped playing video games. Still attracted to guys.
Time and time again I begged God to heal me if being gay wasn’t how I was supposed to be, and time and time again change didn't seem to be His will.
 
I was ashamed. And I was also afraid.
 
I was afraid of anyone finding out. I was afraid they would reject me
In middle school I played leading roles in both of our theater productions, but in high school I quickly realized that the same people in the theater club where also in our Gay-Straight Alliance. I could not risk anyone suspecting that I was gay. No more theater for Pieter.
 
Gay marriage was a particularly contentious topic during the 2008 election, so naturally, our government class played out the same divisive conversations found on CNN. Unintentionally fulfilling stereotypes, I was one of the most ardent opponents of gay marriage—thinking that perhaps that would throw people off my trail. I remember a female classmate turning around in her chair to berate me for being a bigot. Then she said with omniscience, “I bet you’re secretly gay and one day you’re going to come out. You’re just so homophobic because you don’t want anyone to know who you are.” I was terrified.
 
I am most ashamed of the moments where my fear of being outed and disgust of my own sexuality turned to homophobia that hurt others. I’m haunted by a scene from high school cross country. Derek was the only openly gay guy in our school and he was on the team. As we waited at the starting line for a race to begin, everyone paired up for partner stretching. But one by one as Derek asked the other guys to help him stretch, he was turned away with “No. Gross! I don’t want to touch you and I don’t want you touching me!” Then he got to me and I (sheepishly) refused. I dished out the same pain I had spent tears and prayers to soothe.
 
I was ashamed. I was afraid. And I was alone. I thought there was no one else like me. I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people: that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God. Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people. But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight. And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere. I was alone.
 
It was in this loneliness that a desire to be known and loved grew.
 
When I started to share my story with others, it was a mixed bag
One night during sophomore year of high school, I lay on my bed listening to Come to Jesus by Chris Rice on repeat. I didn’t know if I could trust anyone, but I couldn’t handle being alone and ashamed anymore. I finally mustered the courage, walked downstairs, and told my parents. They didn’t know how to help me any more than I did, but it was still a great relief: I wasn't all alone with my secret anymore.
 
Toward the end of high school I shared my story with my youth pastor. One night during a youth conference weekend, our youth pastor gave a devotion about shame and encouraged each of us to talk to an adult leader about our deepest secret. But when I shared my deepest secret, he was silent. After a string of meaningless Christian cliches, he sent me away.
 
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry. I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts. I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired. And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university. The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
 
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year of college after a gay brother was kicked out of our Christian fraternity, I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity. I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better. These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
 
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
 
That motivated me to do something to change that
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
that was over 7 years ago
since then I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
and I started EQUIP with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a biblical sexual ethic




WHAT?


[Notes]
You’ve heard me use that phrase “biblical sexual ethic” a couple of times. You’re probably wondering what that means and how I understand God thinks about this topic.
Let me take a moment to speak carefully about how I think God has invited each of us to steward our sexualities
because while I still hold on to many of the core beliefs I heard growing up, I now hold them in a more nuanced way



What do I believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.

[Notes]
I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction, me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay, is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, he would have expected me to be experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold against me my involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions.
What do I believe?

[Notes]
I do not believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond
The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants, but scientific studies show that only 3-4% of people report experiencing any meaningful change in their same-sex attractions.






God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.
What do I believe?

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to vocational singleness—to give up the prospect of romance, dating, sex, marriage, and children to do kingdom work parents don’t have the time or energy to do--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context
 
For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I want, I started asking God about 5 years ago what He wants
would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness
And about 3 years ago I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness
But no one can live life alone, so three years ago some friends and I started building a Christian brotherhood where men called to singleness for the Lord can live together permanently, called the Nashville Family of Brothers. We’re still a part of our local churches. We’ve got normal jobs. We’re still connected to parents and their kids. But we pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together.



WHY?


[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”
I’m not going to get into those. I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are
No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design






Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singlness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel
you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best






But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
Less commitment and more infidelity
My gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith
My own story of pain
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
but even if I wasn’t convinced logically of a biblical sexual ethic, I couldn’t ignore the evidence I see in my own life and the lives of others that a progressive sexual ethic isn’t God’s best
 I couldn’t ignore the bad fruit of in my life and the lives of others who believe that God blesses same-sex Christian marriages in the same way He blessed opposite-sex Christian marriages

At a 30,000 foot level, the average adult same-sex partnership lasts much shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
And the rates of adultery and infidelity are much higher in same-sex marriages
Now we can argue whether this is the result of societal oppression, the bad fruit of not following God’s design, or both

But for me, what’s much more convincing is that most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobatics to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said for 2000 years
so they get to a place where they don’t believe the Bible is authoritative or binding for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?
Listen, I don’t want that for my friends who are gay
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic in the lives of my gay friends is losing their faith
 
The bad fruit of my own experiences has has also been convincing
Satan told me for years that if I just had a romantic relationship with a man, everything would be better
I’d finally have everything I needed
And I wish I could have just trusted God that Satan’s lies were lies
but I couldn’t
I had to test them for myself
And my own experience has been that romantic relationships with men were not everything I hoped they would be
they were painful
they were not as good as promised
and while I haven’t experienced everything under the Sun, so I can’t say authoritatively that I know from experience that nothing would satisfy me
one experience was just about the clearest contrast between sin and beauty that I could ask for
when I was in a particularly dark place in college, I connected romantically with another guy
and despite the fact that I was doing the things that movies told me would make me feel more connected and loved and known than anything else, I felt so alone
and then after we stopped, the reality of what we had just done set in
We sat there, on the floor, leaning against the wall, shoulder to shoulder
and we started crying, both of us
Mixed in with the crying we both verbalized what we were feeling
we shared how empty both of us felt
how lonely we felt
how messed up this world was and disconnected from God we felt
how confused we were that God would let us be this way and yet connections like we just shared didn’t feel right
and you know what, I didn’t feel alone anymore
I didn’t feel disconnected anymore
you see, the romantic connections that Satan promised would satisfy me failed
But then in stark contrast to that, the two of us confessing to each other and crying out to God satisfied us and felt more beautifully intimate than anything we shared before
 
So no, even if I could convince myself logically of a progressive sexual ethic, I couldn’t get past all of the bad fruit I have seen






Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

The Church MUST do better.
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
But, admittedly, there’s also bad fruit of a biblical sexual ethic
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a biblical sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do
This is because churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of Christians who are gay: churches don’t know how to love us well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either
That sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God
why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings
 
So I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a biblical sexual ethic, because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic



SOLUTION


[Notes]
no, I think the solution is for churches to learn how to better embody a biblical sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people



Solution for Good



Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
So, what does it look like for our churches to become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic?

First, our churches need to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.

Most churches today lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married, teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce. This leads to high divorce rates and a void of theology and practice of vocational singleness among straight Christians. But then we call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship by allowing straight Christians to misuse marriage for their romantic fulfillment while asking only gay Christians to consider vocational singleness. This is hypocritical, and churches lose any credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom.

Instead, we need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness during which we discern whether we are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. Our churches should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
 
Second, our churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality. With compassion and theological accuracy, they should explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do LGBT+ people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to LGBT+ people good?
As a result, everyone in your church would know how to love LGBT+ people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality. Plus, gay people in your church still in the closet would know what you believe, your love for them, and that it is safe to share their story.
 
Third, our churches need to talk about the possibility of same-sex attraction in age-appropriate ways across the lifespan.

Most churches wait until a kid shares that he is gay to address the topic of homosexuality. This is a problem. On average, teens wait five years after first recognizing their same-sex attraction to talk to a parent or pastor. That’s five years that a teen makes sense of these questions alone. Most often, this means that a teen has either developed shame, depression, and suicidality or adopted a progressive sexual ethic (and often both).

Instead, before a teen realizes he or she experiences same-sex attraction, the teen needs to hear that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to, that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less, and that God has good and beautiful plans for them. Then, when teens realize their same-sex attractions, they would quickly share with their parents and pastors, inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways.
 
Fourth, our churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians. They should do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to same-sex attracted people. While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression, churches need recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured. Parents and pastors need to help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.
 
Fifth, our churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort. These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture, adults need to be modeling thriving invocational singleness and be celebrated in the church, and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage. Most importantly, these churches need to be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find, whether that be through intentional Christian communities of celibate (or celibate and married) people or helping celibates move in with marrieds to be a part of their family. Then, these churches should teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gsy people, cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.

I think if we do these things, our churches can become a places that offer gay people something undeniably better than the empty promises of the world
We can be a place where gay Christians find more beauty and connection from following God’s teachings than from seeking out romantic relationships with people of the same sex
 
Amen? Amen!




8 TIPS


[Notes]
So I’ve shared with you my story and how I understand God thinks about these questions
I want to wrap up with some practical advice for everybody.
First I want to speak to the straight people in the room.
I’ve got five suggestions.



Straight People: Tips



Do your homework
Ask gay people about their story
Help gay people find family
Seek Jesus together
Trust God

[Notes]
First, do your homework
we all need to know how to speak into these topics in theologically accurate and compassionate ways
whether its a conversation with friends or with family members, how you speak about this matters—your words can either point people to the love and Lordship of Jesus, or it can become a barrier to gay people knowing God or enable painful choices
But I want to encourage you not to make your gay friends be your teacher
Instead, I want to encourage you to do your own homework
Email me after this workshop and I’ll sent a reading list your way
but if you read only one book, I’d encourage you to start with “Single Gay Christian” by Greg Coles
 
Second, ask gay people about their story
Again, don’t seek out gay people for them to be your primary way of understanding the gay experience and the challenges gay Christians face
But do lean in to the specific gay people you love because you want to know their story better
ask the gay people in your lives to share their story
ask them what has been painful and beautiful
you’re likely to find that they are carrying more wounds that you were expecting
this loves gay people well because we feel more known when people ask us about our story and we feel less shame about the ways some people say we are different
 
Third, help gay people find family
we were all created for intimacy with God and other humans
we need that in spiritual, emotional, and physical ways
gay people in particular often feel ostracized from their biological family and may feel like the best way for them to walk out their sexuality is vocational singleness
they really need their churches to be their family
So help them find family
establish rhythms with the gay people in your life
invite them over for dinner, maybe vacations and holidays, or consider living together after
 
Fourth, seek Jesus together
ultimately this world is broken and we will not be able to avoid enduring some pain
none of us can meeting our intimacy needs fully or finally in this lifetime, we can’t escape loneliness in a final way on this side of Heaven
we can only find hope in God
and the only way we will learn to accept the brokenness and pain of this lifetime
Is if we pray together, study God’s word together, worship together, seek Jesus together
 
Fifth, trust God
as it is with anyone in our life, we need to know what’s our job and what’s God’s job
Our job is to love people well
hold them accountable where they invite you to hold them accountable
seek Jesus together
To help them meet their immediate needs
and then we leave the rest up to God
It’s not our job to change people’s mind--that’s God’s job
It’s not our job to save people--that’s God’s job
It’s not our job to define the schedule on which our friends will make Jesus the Lord of every part of their life--that’s God’s job






Follow Jesus, no matter the cost
Seek out family
Integrate your sexuality, instead of serving it or shaming it
Gay People: Tips

[Notes]
And last but not least, I want to talk to the gay people in the room.
I’ve got three suggestions for yall. These are less prescriptive, and more just take-away’s from my own journey.
 
First, I want to encourage you to follow Jesus, no matter the apparent cost
I know its hard and unfair, but following God’s teachings are better than the alternative
I’ve shared already about my personal experiences and the consistent experiences of gay people around me
I guess I just hope you can learn from my mistakes
I know the feeling of trying to steward your sexualities according to a biblical sexual ethic and feeling lonely and perhaps even depressed and crying out to God, “this couldn’t possibly be your best for me”
and yet, for the gay Christian, in order to submit your life fully to God
and find the most richness and beauty in this life, I’ve seen that we have to accept some hard things
We see that it is unfair and unjust
We see that it will probably continue to be that way
We see that we could reasonably use that to justify doing what we want
But we are convinced that God knows better for us than the wisdom of the age
We are convinced that following Jesus will be worth the cost
We are convinced that picking up our crosses will be better
No matter how painful, no matter how much suffering
Because it is in following Christ’s example by taking on suffering for a purpose that we will find ourselves and find the God whom we were created to be in relationship with
You might ask: what’s the point of my suffering?
Well, I can’t say for every gay Christian
for me, it’s helped me see the pain of people of color and immigrants and poor people and the mentally ill so much better
I want to fight for them
and it helps me fight for other gay people
in ways that I could never if I were straight or if I had not accepted the suffering
I have fully accepted that I cannot undo the pain I have experienced
and things might not change in churches fast enough for me to experience something meaningfully better
but if I can spend my life—suffer—so that the next generation of gay teens experience something radically better than I did
that’s worth it
100 time that’s worth it
I would choose this life over and over again
So please, follow Jesus, no matter the apparent cost, because I’m convinced it will be worth it
 
Second, seek out family
just as I said earlier, we were all created for intimacy with God and other humans
we need that in spiritual, emotional, and physical ways
none of us can make it through this life alone, and that is no less true of gay people
Please don’t be afraid or ashamed of asking others in your community to be family for you
ask them to be a part of their lives
you could even try to start an intentional Christian community with single and married folk
Whatever you do, find family
And I’ll add one little piece of advice that I’ve found helpful: I’ve seen that if I want to be a part of my married friends’ lives, particularly once they’ve had children, I’ve got to be willing to inconvenience myself. To be a part of their family on their terms, because despite the challenges of singleness, raising children is a different kind of hardship than I will never know
 
Third, I want to encourage you to find a way to integrate your sexuality, instead of serving it or shaming it
It’s probably obvious why I would discourage the gay Christian from letting their sexuality dictate the priorities in their life, and I’ll note that straight Christians do this just as often, just perhaps in ways that we’ve become blinded to. There’s an idolatry of romance among straight Christians combined with an acceptance of no-fault divorce and remarriage that straight Christians should find much more troubling than rainbow flags and unicorns.
So I’ll speak to the other: integrating your sexuality instead of being ashamed of it
for a long time I tried to pretend like I was just like every straight person
that there wasn’t anything different about my story or more difficult about the prospects before me
but that just minimized my pain and gave me no space to mourn the injustice in this world
it also nurtured homophobia in my own heart
I first started integrating my sexuality by sharing about it—by sharing my story
this helped remove a lot of shame and helped me identify in helpful ways with how I am different and how God has redeemed that for my good and His glory
then as I started recognizing that my story was different and there were ways I felt more connected to gay people than to straight people, and I gave myself permission to experience that affinity
for me, that looked like calling myself gay, seeing myself as connected to the gay civil rights movement, seeing myself connected to the hate crimes against gay people, and giving myself permission to enjoy gay artists and cultural elements
again, Christ is still the only person that sits on the throne of my life
and everything I do is submitted to His wisdom
and at the same time, there are beautiful aspects of gay culture as a minority culture born out of oppression that are healthy for me to connect with, strengthen my faith, and help me better empathize with others

So I’ve shared with you my story and how I understand God thinks about these questions
And we’ve explored some practical advice for everybody
I think we’ve got about 20 minutes for Q&A



QUESTIONS?


[Notes]
Thank you so much for you time and attention
Please feel free to connect with me over email found at the bottom of your handout
And please, go love the gay people in your life well
And if you’re gay, know that God loves you and has very good things He wants the Church to offer you!






Connect with Pieter at
pieter@equipyourcommunity.org

Learn more at
equipyourcommunity.org
Connect & Learn
