Creating Safe Spaces: Same-sex Attracted Residents
presented by

Pieter Valk
Executive Director
EQUIP NASHVILLE
Guiding Questions
How do I create a safe space and foster a culture of acceptance on my hall?

How do I encourage my same-sex attracted (SSA) residents toward identify and fullness of life in Christ?

Discussion
What have your experiences been serving residents that experience SSA?
What have some of your successes been?
When have you felt inadequate or uncomfortable?

17
Basic Assumptions
Lipscomb University holds certain beliefs
Students’ conduct should reflect those beliefs
Lipscomb University is a place for intellectual discovery where students can ask: But what about after college?


[Notes]
homosexual activity (sexual or romantic) is sinful
experience SSA is NOT a sin
Basic Assumptions
We want the best things for our residents
We can’t make choices for others
We can recognize the Church’s past, encourage our residents in their Christian journey, and trust the Holy Spirit

University Policy
Code of Conduct
Sexual Morality Policy
All students should practice the Biblical standards of sexual morality. Sexual immorality of any kind is prohibited. 
Anti-Bullying Policy

…no student, faculty or staff member should be subjected to bullying or harassing behavior by any other student, faculty or staff member.
Title IX Policy

Gender-based Harassment (Bullying) - verbal acts, written statements, or any other actions that may be physically threatening, harmful, or humiliating because the student does not conform to gender stereotypes or due to the gender of the person
CampusResources
Campus Resources
University Counseling Center
Campus Ministry
Intimacy Wholeness Group for Men
LGBT Discussion Group
Supporting Sexual Minority Students


[Notes]
not to pray the gay away but as confidential support
confidential resource to navigate faith
previously advertised
in the works
in the works
Questions?
Guiding Questions
How do I create a safe space and foster a culture of acceptance on my hall?

How do I encourage my same-sex attracted (SSA) residents toward identify and fullness of life in Christ?

Barriers to Safe Spaces: BULLYING
Overt Bullying
Physical (hitting, punching, beating)
Verbal (teasing, name calling, threats)
Emotional (intimidation using gestures, threats)
Sexual
Cyberbullying (online harassment, hate messages, threats, impersonation, and other digital abuse)
Hazing  

-STOMP Out Bullying
Subtle Bullying
Social exclusion
Online hate messages (yikyak)
Impersonation, mocking
Offensive language

-STOMP Out Bullying

[Notes]
yikyak
Signs of Bullying
Few friends
Afraid of walking around campus or taking part in campus activities
Lost interest/poor performance in classes
Sad, moody, teary, depressed, or anxious
Frequent headaches, stomachaches, etc.
Sleep disturbance and/or loss of appetite
Low self-esteem

-STOMP Out Bullying
Discussion
How have you noticed bullying on your hall or on campus?
Was it overt or subtle?
What were the signs?
How did you respond?


37
Creating Safe Spaces: What YOU can do
1. Grow Sensitivity & Empathy
Examine your own habits and beliefs

1. Grow Sensitivity & Empathy
Examine your own habits and beliefs



What terms do you use and how do you use them?

Gay
Faggot


Homosexual
Same-sex attracted


[Notes]
If you were to describe Elton John, what’s your go-to term and why?
1. Grow Sensitivity & Empathy
Examine your own habits and beliefs

People choose who they are attracted to.
People will think I am gay if I hang out with my gay friend.
If he is gay, he must be attracted to me.
Gay people have sex all the time and all cheat.
Gay men are all flamboyant and feminine.
A person can’t be both gay and a Christian.

What do you believe?


[Notes]
Do you hold any of these beliefs?
Do you think these beliefs are counterproductive to be sensitive and empathetic to LGBT+?
How would it make an LGBT+ person feel to know you believe these things?
1. Grow Sensitivity & Empathy
Examine your own habits and beliefs
Practice language mirroring

1. Grow Sensitivity & Empathy
Examine your own habits and beliefs
Practice language mirroring
Listen to someone’s story

2. Model Language & Actions
Be intentional about using sensitive language and acting in ways that reflect an empathetic perspective


[Notes]
Best way to lead is to model (Jesus)
how do you expect them to do it if you don’t?
3. Assist Resident Learning
When a resident says or does something that is counterproductive to creating safe spaces, be a leader and inform them


[Notes]
in ways that aren’t humiliating
3. Assist Resident Learning
You pass a group of residents talking about a fellow student, 

“…Is that a girl or a guy? How should I know? As long as it doesn’t use the same bathroom as me…”

What could you say?

4. Build Relationships
Is your door really open to everyone?
Reach out to residents
Ask them about their stories
Encourage freedom from shame
Treat them as same

55

[Notes]
have your facebook comments communicated something?
if neutral, consider making a statement of invitation
satan’s favorite tool to separate from God, shame vs guilt
don’t treat like opposite sex
different -> isolation, shame, inadequacy
ex) changing, touch

Questions & Feedback

