
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

webinars
equip



[Notes]
Welcome to our Equip Webinar this month
We’re looking forward to getting in a habit of monthly webinars
If you’re curious, our April webinar will be on Sexual Stewardship for All People
Second, I will send full notes from today’s webinar after we finish, so don’t worry if you miss something but didn’t get a chance to write it down

And finally, I will be recording the webinar to add this content to Equip’s Digital Leaders Course
But I will turn off recording before we get to Q&A at the end

ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Discerning Singleness& Marriage


[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today: discerning between vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Webinar Key Questions

Why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How can we discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How can pastors and parents help Christians discern well?

[Notes]
today, we’re going to explore three questions:
Why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How can we discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How can pastors and parents help Christians discern well?


Why discern?


[Notes]
so first: why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How are Christians called to steward their sexuality?

All first called to temporary singleness and discernment, then later…
Some called to vocational singleness
Others called to Christian marriage

[Notes]
Here’s a summary of how Christians have historically understood the Bible to teach about sexual stewardship
—about the options available to Christians
and how we carefully discern with God how to steward those options

This is the big picture for what it looks like to faithfully, in God-honoring ways, steward our sexualities

We are all first called to a period of temporary singleness (that’s the singleness we’re born into)
and discern whether God is calling us to vocational singleness or to Christian marriage

Why “vocation”?

A Christian vocation is a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision.

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention. Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom.

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation?
Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

How are Christians called to steward their sexuality?

[Notes]
Here’s a representation of those same ideas in a diagram
As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of a prolonged temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

I want to sit here a second
These distinctions were mind-blowing for me when I first saw them in Scripture

None of us are on a default path
Not supposed to just take what we want
Shouldn’t continue in the limbo of uncommitted singleness
Two options
Both equally good and normal but one more common
Need to ask God which He wants me to do
I won’t get the gift from God to do either well until I step out of temporary singleness and COMMIT
What does Matthew 19 say?

Jesus raises the marriage standard

Disciples sardonically suggest lifetime singleness

Jesus: only those whom God gives either marriage or lifetime singleness can accept his teaching, respectively

[Notes]
With that foundation, what evidence might we find in Scripture for the call to discernment?

Let’s start with Matthew 19

Background:
In Genesis, God commanded every faithful Jew to marry and procreate
and obeying God's command was central to the Israelites' prosperity

God promised to bless the descendants of Abraham with land, military success, and economic flourishing
but the key to all of that was that Abraham's descendants had to multiply through faithful procreation

So if a Jew failed to marry and procreate, it was seen as a grave sin again the Hebrew people
putting in jeopardy their blessing from God
both barrenness and celibacy were seen as curses and sin

Simply put: marriage was a big deal to the Jews

Also, it’s helpful to remember this Christ’s disciples were teenagers just about the age when EVERYONE around them was starting to get married

1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan.
2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
3 Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”
4 “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’[a] 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’[b]? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
7 “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”

Okay so what’s going on here? two opposing factions of religious leaders have gathered around Jesus
each side is hoping to use Jesus to win their debate with the other side,
and each side is hoping to simultaneously find a way to turn the townspeople against Jesus
so they ask him a trick question, of sorts
they ask him about divorce

8 Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. 9 I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”

these opposing factions of religious leaders have different opinions on acceptable grounds for divorce
one side is a little more conservative, one side is a little more liberal
but instead of taking either of their sides, Jesus calls God’s people to an even more rigorous standard,
back to God’s original intentions for marriage
that, except in rare circumstances, God's people should never divorce
everyone is surprised by Christ's answer,
even his disciples

10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”

as Jesus mentions, divorce had become fairly common among God's people
so Christ's suggestion that they turn back the clock, so to speak, seemed extreme, unrealistic
so the disciples joke back that if the grounds for divorce were that limited
if godly marriage really meant lifetime marriage, no matter what, most of the time
then they joke that it would be better break God's commandment to marry and procreate
and to never marry
then Jesus does something that surprises everyone

11 Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”

In v 11 he’s referring to his high standard of marriage
Not everyone can accept this standard
But only those to whom the gift of marriage has been given

Then in v 12, Jesus says that there are others who are called to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom
Not everyone can accept this teaching either
Only those who have been called to it

ohh, and what does he mean by “eunuch”
Lifetime
Built up the king’s kingdom
Lived in the king’s palace, honored
So we’re talking about a permanent calling of singleness for the kingdom

to paraphrase, Jesus says,
"yeah, not everyone will be able to live up to that high commitment of marriage
so only those of you who've been given the capacity to accept that high standard should get married
and then there are other's of you who should intentionally give up romance, dating, marriage, sex, and biological children
for a lifetime
and use the time and energy you would have spent on a spouse and kids
to instead contribute to my big Jesus project of making the world right with all of your time and energy"

this is a HUGE deal
Jesus tells a crowd Jewish people who were commanded to marry and procreate
who thought singleness was a curse of loneliness
that they should consider lifetime vocational singleness
that that is an equally valid, equally normal, equally valuable path for Jesus-followers
What does 1 Corinthians 7 say?

God gives vocational singleness to some, Christian marriage to others

Committing to either without the gift is dangerous

Better to remain in vocational singleness x4

[Notes]
Then there’s 1 Cor 7

We’re going to move through this one more quickly

1 Now for the matters you wrote about: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.” 2 But since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife, and each woman with her own husband. 3 The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband. 4 The wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband. In the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife. 5 Do not deprive each other except perhaps by mutual consent and for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer. Then come together again so that Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. 6 I say this as a concession, not as a command.

In brief, Paul is calling married people to faithful monogamy

7 I wish that all of you were as I am. But each of you has your own gift from God; one has this gift, another has that.

Paul was permanently celibate after his conversion
He prefers vocational singleness, wishing all were called to it, but
Each has his own gift from God
The gift is from God
God gives the gift
God doesn’t offer each of us both gifts
God offers one to some, and the other to others

8 Now to the unmarried[a] and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do.

This is the second time Paul shows his preference for lifetime vocational singleness

9 But if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.

A common misinterpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:9 is that poor sexual stewardship in singleness shows that one has not been given the gift of singleness and should instead marry.
Now, it’s more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter

Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage:
it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
but a not-yet-apparent gift of vocational singleness does not mean an automatic call to Christian marriage
it means that the individual should discern further whether they have a positive calling

Plus, MARRIAGE IS NOT A REMEDY FOR WEAKNESS (hurts women+kids and violates the testimony of marriage)

For the sake of time, I’m gonna skip verses 10 - 24

25 Now about virgins: I have no command from the Lord, but I give a judgment as one who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy. 26 Because of the present crisis, I think that it is good for a man to remain as he is. 27 Are you pledged to a woman? Do not seek to be released. Are you free from such a commitment? Do not look for a wife. 28 But if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and I want to spare you this.
29 What I mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short. From now on those who have wives should live as if they do not; 30 those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep; 31 those who use the things of the world, as if not engrossed in them. For this world in its present form is passing away.

”present crisis” or “present age” here have consistently been interpreted as referring to the age after Christ and before Christ’s return
It’s not referring to a narrower time
And therefore suggest that Paul’s wisdom is no longer relevant to us today
Plus, today no less tumultuous

We also see here our 3rd recommendation to remain in permanent vocational singleness

32 I would like you to be free from concern. An unmarried man is concerned about the Lord’s affairs—how he can please the Lord. 33 But a married man is concerned about the affairs of this world—how he can please his wife— 34 and his interests are divided. An unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the Lord’s affairs: Her aim is to be devoted to the Lord in both body and spirit. But a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world—how she can please her husband. 35 I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord.

The point of vocational singleness is to serve God with undivided devotion

36 If anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to, and if his passions are too strong[b] and he feels he ought to marry, he should do as he wants. He is not sinning. They should get married. 37 But the man who has settled the matter in his own mind, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin—this man also does the right thing. 38 So then, he who marries the virgin does right, but he who does not marry her does better.[c]

This is a complicated passage, but the most textually robust and historic interpretation is that it’s referring to early Church practical of spiritual betrothal

39 A woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, but he must belong to the Lord. 40 In my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is—and I think that I too have the Spirit of God.

Here’s our 4th recommendation to remain in permanent vocational singleness

So there’s a lot going on there
To recap, Paul said God calls some to vocational singleness and some to marriage
And Paul praises lifetime vocational singleness four times

Is Matt 19 / 1 Cor 7 singleness permanent?

Matt 19 - call beyond born-into singleness, comparison to permanence of eunuch
Luke 18:28-30 - 100-fold blessing of family for giving up marriage/biochildren, no take-backs
1 Cor 7 - Paul prefers lifetime singleness X4
Unanimous understanding of those the Apostles discipled (and their disciples)

[Notes]
As we’ll see, a key question is whether the kind of singleness Jesus and Paul are talking about in Matt 19 and 1 Cor 7 supposed to be permanent
So is it?
I think so!

Well, as we’ve already mentioned, in Matthew 19, Jesus speaks of a call beyond the singleness we're born into
and compares vocational singleness to the permanent state of being a eunuch.

In Luke 18:28-30 Jesus promises an 100-fold blessing of family in this life
to those who give up the prospect of marriage and children for the sake of the kingdom.
It's seems a bit like cheating for someone to ask Jesus for this 100-fold blessing
and then change their mind and get married

As we’ve already mentioned, In 1 Cor 7, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness
and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness than get married

Plus, the people who first heard the teachings of Jesus and Paul,
the Christians those Apostles mentored, and their disciples
unanimously taught that Jesus and Paul were speaking of a permanent giving up
of marriage, sex, and children in Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7

this includes St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle),
St. Justin Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen,
and St. Methodius of Olympus.
6 Reasons to Discern

God has a preference/calling that He wants to share

Both involve a gift received at commitment

Both vocational singleness and Christian marriage are permanent

[Notes]
All told, here’s six reasons why I think every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage

1. God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
Matt 19 and 1 Cor 7 teach that our vocation is given or called, not chosen

And this makes sense, certainly God can imagine all of our possible futures
and tell each of us personally whether singleness or marriage will lead to more goodness for us and more glory for God

2. Both vocations involve a gift to accept the teachings and the call, and a gift in response to accepting the call to do it well

3. God intended for Christian marriage and vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.

Temporary singleness not mentioned or gifted

There is no default path

Unwise to unthinkingly take what we want
6 Reasons to Discern

[Notes]
4. temporary singleness not mentioned or gifted
Show me a verse that commends temporary singleness or speaks for a gift for it

5. no default path
We’re obviously not born into committed celibacy or Christian marriage
Both Matt 19 and 1 Cor 7 speak about intentionally stepping into one or another and caution against do so lightly

6. It would be unwise to unthinkingly take what we want
While God wants us to share with Him whether we’d prefer vocational singleness or Christian marriage
ultimately God wants to show us why His preference is even better for us!

“Discernment” in the Bible?

Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.

[Notes]
is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no

but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church,
and the only two Protestant theologians to offer systematic theologies of celibacy: Max Thurian and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift,
if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly

how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?

DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of singleness or a vocational of marriage.
And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference



6 Reasonable Objections

Why not just continue in temporary singleness?

I want to marry and be a parent, so that must be God’s desires…

Lifetime singleness is more natural than lifetime faithful monogamy

[Notes]
now there’s reasonable objections people sometimes raise
and I want to address those

1. Why not just continue in temporary singleness? What difference does it really make? 

Well, there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children
vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage
vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

But I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.

Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage Christians to consider kingdom singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
—they’re commending committed, lifetime singleness.
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.
So if someone is in temporary singleness, without the gift of singleness, and struggling, perhaps part of the difficult is that they haven’t receive the gift yet

That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness.
For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage,
continuing into their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life.
While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.   

2. Some object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.


3. Others argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.
We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.

In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come naturally to us.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.

So we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness


But Jesus says “choose” in Matt 19:12

What are the consequences of not discerning or ignoring God’s call?

Why discern if one is much more common?
6 Reasonable Objections

[Notes]
4. But in Matt 19:12, doesn’t Jesus say “choose” to live like a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom?

Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?
Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into vocational singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.

Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.

We should also discern God’s calling, ask God to show us why that is best for us, be patient for our heart to grow to desire God’s best for us,
and then choose to accept God’s gift!

5. what if we ignore God's preference or never seek it? are there consequences of not discerning?

I don’t think God is going to strike down someone’s marriage or celibacy, even if it wasn’t His best
I think God wants us to be faithful to our commitments and He will provide the gift of grace to do it well
But for some, maybe the reasons things are difficult is because it wasn’t God’s best path for them

6. why discern if one is much less common?

90% is pretty good odds
But if we all assume marriage
90% will take it for granted, assume they are owed it, not see it as a gift, now own the responsibility
And the 10% will feel cheated
100% of people open-handedly discerning will lead to 100% of people joyfully accepting God’s call and faithfully walking it out

Should every Christian young adult open-handedly discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?

Yes.

[Notes]
So, should every Christian young adult open-handedly discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
Should every Christian young adult discern with God, ask Him which gift He wants to give?
Ask Him what His preference is for whether we pursue vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
Yes!
Webinar Key Questions

Why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How can we discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How can pastors and parents help Christians discern well?

[Notes]
How, then, can we discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How to discern?


[Notes]
I want to open this section by sharing a bit about my discernment story
my discernment


[Notes]
By the end of college I had experienced multiple long periods of singleness and studied Jesus & Paul's words about lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
While I was out to most people in my life, I also ended up dating a couple of women, uniquely falling in love with them, and almost got engaged.
So despite my sexuality, I knew that Christian marriage could work for me.

But the Holy Spirit made clear to me that I wasn't supposed to go take the gift I preferred.
Instead I was supposed to ask, "God, do you have a preference for whether I pursue vocational singleness or Christian marriage?"

I wasn't aware of it, but over the next three years, God led me through a process of discernment:

I dug deeper into historic theology of vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
I met with my therapist and mentors to make sense of my fears around both singleness and marriage.
I read "God's Voice Within" by Mark Thibodeaux to develop my capacity for general Christian discernment.
And I gained clarity about the kingdom work I was called to and increasing peace about passing on the work of raising kids
to give myself fully to the work of Equip, being a therapist, and public discipleship around vocational singleness.

Plus, I was patient
I accidentally but meaningfully discerned for more than three years
Hesitating to drawn any solid conclusions
And instead just giving God space to give me peace

But once I felt confidence that God was calling me to vocational singleness, I didn’t rush to make a lifetime commitment
Based on the wisdom of people committed to vocational singleness over the past 2,000 years, I knew I first needed to start with a shorter commitment
to seek greater confidence

and I knew I needed to figure out how I would find family
you see, I also knew I didn't have a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.

So I asked my pastor, the late Fr. Thomas Mckenzie, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”

Here’s how he responded:
“I’ll be honest. You’re not going to find the kind of family you need at this church or any church in Nashville anytime soon.

But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family.
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.

I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Maybe by the time you die, our church will be good enough at family that the community you started won't be necessary anymore."

So that’s what I did!
I gathered 10 other single Christian men I knew who were at least open to long-term singleness and intentional Christian community
And we spent 6 months sharing weekly meals, hanging out, and asking God whether He was calling any of us to start an intentional Christian community

By the end of that, two of us felt confidence that God was calling us to start what we’d eventually call the Nashville Family of Brothers
so we separately made one-year commitments to vocational singleness and to the Nashville Family of Brothers

That was in 2018
Today, there’s 7 of us living in a house together
gather for a quick time of prayer before work each morning,
have family dinners three nights a week,
go on vacations together.
and alternate Thanksgivings and Christmases with our brotherhood and our biological families,
all while we're trying to figure out what kind of kingdom work God is calling each of us to,
and while we each discern whether we're called to commit to this brotherhood for a lifetime.
We're still committed to a couple of different local churches that we go to.
We're still connected to families at our churches and friends at work and people in our neighborhood.
We've got normal jobs.

And this September, I’m going to be making lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and the to the Nashville Family of Brothers
Ingredients for Wise Discernment

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kingdom work you’re called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Patiently seek support from church, family, friends, spiritual director

[Notes]
I can know look back and see that, unbeknownst to me,
God was leading me through time-tested ingredients for wise discernment between vocational singleness and Christian marriage:

1. Grow your capacity for general Christian discernment
2. Deepen theological respect for both singleness and marriage while addressing emotional resistance to either vocation 
3. Discover what kingdom work God's calling you to do
4. Consider your past and current circumstances
5. Patiently seek support from church, family, friends, spiritual director

after which, the Christian can take small steps in the direction they think God is calling, to seek confidence
and particularly for those who are feeling called to vocational singleness, those small steps should include
figuring out where you might find lifelong, lived-in family in vocational singleness

A word of caution about these ingredients: no one ingredient is meant to reveals God’s preference to you.
That goes both ways. Just because you want to get married and your Christian college roommate dreamed about being in your wedding doesn’t mean your discernment process is over.
We each need to take the time to collect each of these ingredients and patiently seek mature confirmation of our intuition.

But this also reassures someone who is collecting these ingredients and one question seems to point you toward the vocation you don’t want.
Don’t fret or give up. Just keep discerning.
Most who wisely discern will find a mix of signals among the fruit of seeking each of these elements of discernment,
but the results will probably lean in one direction or the other.

Then after patiently seeking confirmation from God for that leaning, God will provide the confidence we need
—usually just short of the amount we desire, but just enough to take the next step.

Let’s explore each of those ingredients.
1. Grow discernment “muscles”

Learn how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of my question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence.

[Notes]
before we discern the specific question of vocational singleness and Christian marriage, we need to grow our general capacity for Christian discernment
there are many Christian traditions of discernment
there no “best” tradition for discerning vocational singleness and Christian marriage
but whatever tradition fits you best, lean into that and grow your muscle to discern

I found it helpful to explore Ignatian Christian discernment, arguable the oldest and most develop tradition of Christian discernment
I read the book God’s Voice Within by Mark Thibodeaux, a really accessible intro to Ignatian discernment, even for non-Catholics like me

That book taught me how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of my question,
seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God,
seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence.

Some of you might find it helpful to meet with a spiritual director to guide your discernment and help you build these muscles.

2. Remove emotional & theological barriers

Study how the Church has consistently understood the Bible to teach about vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Remove emotional barriers with a pastor or therapist
Awareness, not preference-lessness

[Notes]
Second, Deepen theological respect for both singleness and marriage while addressing emotional resistance to either vocation

A clear understanding of God’s design for the vocations of marriage and singleness will give you a better framework in which to digest the other ingredients for discernment.

If you could read only two books, I would suggestion you read Breaking the Marriage Idol by Kutter Calloway and Marriage and Celibacy by Max Thurian.
Calloway’s Breaking the Marriage Idol is the best analysis of western cultural Christianity’s relationship with romance,
and it includes some preliminary suggestions for how we can better teach about and support both marriage and vocational singleness.
Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy is by far the best text on the theology of vocational singleness.

Other standouts for the Christian’s theology of marriage include Theology of the Body by Pope John Paul II, Mere Sexuality by Todd Wilson, and Divine Sex by Jonathan Grant.
While I am not a Catholic, JPII’s Theology of the Body is a must-read for any Christian
(or you can read Christopher West’s Theology of the Body for Beginners if you can’t make it through the original text).

On the topic of vocational singleness, The Significance of Singleness by Christina Hitchcook and Singled Out by Christine Colon and Bonnie Field are both valuable explorations of the topic,
but fall short of approaching the topic with the same theological depth as Max Thurian.
Another helpful resources is Toward a Protestant Theology of Celibacy by Russell Hobbs—a great review of all of the Christian literature on the topic of celibacy.

Just as important as having the right theological foundation, we also need to remove some obstacles that might have accrued over time.
We develop and continue to live in a broken world.
Loneliness, divorce in your family, sexual sin, heartbreak, abandonment, rejection, and a host of other emotional wounds related to marriage, singleness, and family can bias our discernment.
The Christian would benefit from processing those wounds with a parent, pastor, or counselor to remove any hurdles to clearly hearing God’s calling.

With each of these ingredients for discerning marriage or vocational singleness, I want to emphasize signs a person might be called to vocational singleness.
To be clear: I do not want anyone to mistakenly discern vocational singleness anymore than I want Christians to mistakenly discern marriage.
But too few Christians have discerned a call to vocational singleness.
While at least 90% of Christians will be called to marriage, it’s reasonable to assume that God wants to call at least 5% of Christians to vocational singleness.
Yet less than 1% of Christians accept a call to vocational singleness in the modern era.

To that end, as you’re studying theology of marriage and vocational singleness, if you find the theology of vocational singleness particularly beautiful, pay attention to that.
That doesn’t necessarily mean you are called to vocational singleness.
Those ultimately called to marriage will find theology of singleness appealing as well.
But a deep appreciation for the theology of vocational singleness may be an early sign of a Christian’s calling.

3. Consider kingdom work

Perhaps if you’re called to be a pastor, teacher, helping professions, etc., vocational singleness is better suited?

Or perhaps you feel called to raise children as your primary kingdom work.

Or neither…

[Notes]
Third, consider what kingdom work you’re called to and whether that points to one vocation or another

Pastors, teachers, and other occupations in the helping professions that require numerous hours of work after 5 pm will be the first to tell you:
it is difficult to be a good parent to both your church, classroom, etc. and to a set of kids at home.

While I don’t advocate for mandatory priestly celibacy,
one of the primary reasons the Catholic Church asks its pastors to be celibate is so that they can fully commit themselves to their parish family. 

Inherent in the stories of pastors, teachers, and others seems to lie a recognition that raising children is a full-time job
that might be incompatible with some occupational professions and with some kingdom work.
Paul understood this in 1 Corinthians 7: 32-35 when he spoke about God’s design for vocational singleness.
A key feature of Paul’s singleness was that he could fully commit himself to the kingdom work he had been called to
because he didn’t have the do the important and costly work of raising a family.

Perhaps the kind of work you are called to is more compatible with either marriage or vocational singleness.

It's been a journey trying to figure out what kingdom work I'm called to,
but today, I’m a proud godfather and blessed with the responsibility of helping his parents
raise him (and his siblings) to be faithful Christian disciples.
I'm a licensed professional counselor and I get to help people make sense of big questions of faith and family
I'm humbled God has used me to start a ministry that helps pastors and parents
teach their churches and kids the kind of stuff we're talking about here.
And I'm grateful to get to be a part of building that intentional Christian community
with the other men in the Nashville Family of Brothers and offer lifelong family to people who are lonely.
All of that is made possible by my availability in vocational singleness.
I know from repeated conversations with my married friends raising kids that I would have to sacrifice one if not multiple of the kingdom works I’m doing,
if I were instead doing the important kingdom work of raising kids

Many of my friends see their work as a mother or father as their primary calling, and then their occupation—the work they get paid for—is merely a means to an ends.
Certainly, they prefer work that pays well, matches their skills and interests, and is participating justly in the economy.
But their first job is their family. People drawn to this vocation are likely called to marry and raise children.

Most people, however, don’t feel confidence in either of these directions.
They don’t feel a clear calling to a work that would be better served by a vocation of singleness.
But they also don’t feel a particular calling to raise a family as their primary work.

Don’t get me wrong—many people want to make a different in the world and be a parent,
but those leanings don’t tell us much about whether God is calling that person to marriage or a vocation of singleness.
And that’s okay. For some this line of exploration will be fruitful, and for others it will not.
But thankfully there are many ways a person might collect data to use in their discernment.

4. Consider past & present

Has God left breadcrumbs to suggest my future path?

“…spiritual direction of these people should gradually lead them to consider that, if they ask for it, God will grant them the gifts necessary for accepting a way of life which they did not choose...”

[Notes]
Fourth, reflect on God’s providence in your past and present circumstances

Has God been trying to tell us something?
Has He been gently nudging us toward one vocation or another?
Perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to a vocation of celibacy?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to lifetime singleness.
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions.

Max Thurian, my favorite author on vocational singleness, says it this way:
“...the circumstances of life can be signs of the vocation of God. The Lord, who directs all things by his providence,
can show a man in his life history his intention of calling him to celibacy.
St Paul recalls the meaning of a person’s past history when he writes to the Corinthians...(1 Cor 7:17-24).
The apostle does not, of course, make past history into a determinism...
But he sees in past life and in present circumstances, in the state or the condition assigned to each man,
a result of the providence of God and a way of being led to hear the call of God and of serving him.”

So perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is because God intends for them to be single.

Now this is a tricky subject, on which I think Thurian’s words would again be helpful:

“We have not forgotten that there are people for whom unmarried life was not a free and voluntary choice but was rather an obligation imposed on them by the circumstances of their life.
They were not able to marry, although they would have liked to do so. We should not speak of vocation or choice on the part of these men and women.
However, this does not mean that the hard sacrifice which was imposed on them cannot take on a meaning in the plan of God.
They can realize afterwards that this condition which was imposed on them has enabled them, in spite of great difficulties, to serve the Church more freely.
The spiritual direction of these people should gradually lead them to consider that, if they ask for it, God will grant them the gifts necessary for accepting a way of life which they did not choose...”
5. Patiently seek support from church, friends, family

Involve parents, pastors, mentors, and friends to speak into every aspect of your discernment
Seek out a spiritual director to guide your discernment
Take your time

[Notes]
The fifth and perhaps most obvious ingredient for discerning between vocational singleness and marriage is to patiently seek support from church, family, friends, and perhaps a spiritual director

Our parents, pastors, mentors, and friends have unique perspective on our lives.
They might come alongside you in your study of theology of marriage and vocational singleness.
Maybe they’ve grown up with you and know what emotional barriers you might be experiencing to open-handedly offering this question to God.
Perhaps they can help you process emotional wounds standing in the way of receiving from God.
The connection between your work and your relational vocation might be more apparent to your friends.
Or maybe they see God’s providence in your life in ways you can’t.

I already mentioned that you might find it helpful to invite a spiritual director to guide your discernment process.

Oh, and I said patiently discern.
I started intentionally discerning more than 5 years ago
Throughout that time I’ve asked a prayer team of friends, my parents, people at church, mentors, and pastors to pray for my discernment and speak into my discernment.
Confidence

“A man will never have complete certainty concerning his vocation and the rightness of his choice. He must, to a certain extent, make a leap in the dark. Sometimes it is not until after decision and self-commitment that a vocation becomes clearer and more certain…”

[Notes]
Once you’ve gathered all of the evidence you can, leaned into the discernment process, arrived at a plausible conclusion, and tested this conclusion,
there’s only one thing left to do: take a leap.

Often, we will find ourselves wishing for more confidence before taking another step, but Thurian offers this encouragement:

“A man will never have complete certainty concerning his vocation and the rightness of his choice. He must, to a certain extent, make a leap in the dark.
Sometimes it is not until after decision and self-commitment that a vocation becomes clearer and more certain.
God wills the just to live by faith, in other words, often by decisions that are more or less blind, and not by sight, by logical reasoning, by objective criteria or by miraculous visions.
If God grants these things, we must bless Him for them, but they are not necessary for the response to a vocation.
This act of faith and this decision, which sometimes have to be made without evidence or insight, are not, however, unmotivated acts or a sort of wager.
The act of faith, the response to a vocation, the decision for a way of life or the choice of a ministry are founded on the Word of God, read and meditated upon in a spirit of prayer.
Thus the assurance given by Christ in the Gospel that celibates for the kingdom of heaven’s sake are following his example and are in communion with his manhood,
and the assertions of St Paul concerning the value of celibacy for the ministry, will be supports on which faith and decision can be solidly based.”

But a leap doesn’t mean immediately making lifetime commitments to either vocational singleness of Christian marriage
it means taking small steps in the direction you think God is calling to seek confidence

and particularly you are feeling called to vocational singleness, those small steps should include
figuring out where you might find lifelong, lived-in family in vocational singleness
LGBT+ Discernment

Can gay people genuinely discern if they feel like they only have one option?
Are their negative effects of defaulting to celibacy (perpetual temporary singleness)?

[Notes]
This might be a controversial opinion, but I think every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between
vocational singleness and Christian marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
including LGBT+ Christians

this doesn’t mean that I think every gay Christian has to date someone of the opposite sex
but at means at least being emotionally and theologically open to the possibility
and genuinely discerning both

If we’re going to ask straight Christians to discern both, we’ve got to ask gay Christians to discern both

As for the impacts of never committing to vocational singleness
and instead defaulting to long-term singleness in a way that might feel forced and involuntary
I think there’s lot of dangers associated with that
I’d commend to you a lengthy essay I wrote on this exact topic titled “From Involuntary Celibacy to Thriving”
at pieterLvalk dot com

in short, involuntary celibacy leads to self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing that Satan uses to tempt us to self-destruction
instead, we’ve got to own our celibacy because there are significant advantages to being all-in. 
And discernment can help us own our celibacy.
You see, discernment is about much more than just identifying the most likely path forward.
It's also about accepting, embracing, choosing, taking a leap of faith, seeking confirmation, and stepping forward.
Discernment can help us move from seeing our celibacy as involuntary to seeing our celibacy as chosen.
Webinar Key Questions

Why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How can we discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How can pastors and parents help Christians discern well?

[Notes]
so we’ve talked about why we should discern and how we can discern
now let’s conclude with how can pastors and parents help Christians discern well
Support from Pastors & Parents


[Notes]
Here’s six ways pastors and parents can support the discernment of others
Supporting discernment

Teach kids to anticipate discernment both
Model both in your family by including celibates
Celebrate both in your church with public vocational singleness commitments
Value both by hiring both as church leaders at all levels
Help teens grow general discernment capacity
Invite 20s/30s to discern & guide

[Notes]
Teach kids to anticipate discernment both
Model both in your family by including celibates
Celebrate both in your church with public vocational singleness commitments
Value both by hiring both as church leaders at all levels
Help teens grow general discernment capacity
Invite 20s/30s to discern & guide

1. Teach kids to anticipate discernment of both

Talk about the possibilities of both vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Building anticipation for a time when they’ll ask God which adventure He has for them

[Notes]
first, teach kids to anticipate discernment between vocational singleness and Christian marriage

from a young age, talk about the possibilities of both vocational singleness and Christian marriage for your kids
talk about the fact that God knows which will be best each of them
and build positive anticipation for a time when they’ll get to ask God which adventure He’ll call them on!
2. Model both in your family by including celibates

Talk about the possibilities of both vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Building anticipation for a time when they’ll ask God which adventure He has for them

[Notes]
second, model both vocational singleness and Christian marriage in your home by making sure to include people called to vocational singleness in the life of your family

kids need to see both modeled as good and beautiful in your home to believe both could be good for them!

You could be intentional about choosing vocational singles as godparents for your children to knit them into your family
you invite single people to weekly dinner with your family. Or include them in holidays and vacations.
You could even invite single people to live in your home, commit to your family, and help you raise your kids.
3. Celebrate both withpublic commitments

Talk about the possibilities of both vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Building anticipation for a time when they’ll ask God which adventure He has for them

[Notes]
third, celebrate both vocational singleness and Christian marriage in your community
particularly by making sure your church celebrates those committing to vocational singleness

When the Nashville Family of Brothers was first developing, my pastor encouraged us to make our first commitment publicly.

Why? Because he knew that our families and friends needed to see us making this commitment so that they would take our vocations more seriously.
He knew that they would realize the weight of our commitments and our need for support from them in the coming months and years.
And he knew that we needed a public celebration for the joy and weight of the commitments to settle in for us.

As I’ve made one-year and then three-year public commitments over my discernment, I’ve consistently seen this to be true.

This could be a simple as someone committed to vocational singleness gathering friends and family
Meeting in the church sanctuary
Singing some favorite worship songs together
Reading passages of Scripture outloud about vocational singleness
Writing out some public commitments to refraining from romance and sex and using that availability for the sake of the kingdom
Have friends and family lay hands on the person committing and pray for God to sustain their commitment
Sing a couple of more songs
And then celebrate the commitments afterward with dinner at a favorite restaurant
And maybe even a celebratory vacation

Then you can celebrate the anniversary of that commitment each year
And churches can be intentional about celebrating the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids
4. Value both by hiring both as church leaders

Kids need to see vocational singles upfront and serving as head ministers, preaching pastors, worship leaders, youth pastors, and children’s pastors.

[Notes]
fourth, value both by hiring both as church leaders at all levels

kids need to see vocational singles upfront and serving as head ministers, preaching pastors, worship leaders,
youth pastors, and children’s pastors.
5. Help teens grow general discernment capacity

Teach teens how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of my question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence.

[Notes]
fifth, help teens grow general discernment capacity

teach them how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of my question,
seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God,
seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence.

before specifically discerning between vocational singleness and Christian marriage,
help them practice discernment on less consequential decisions
6. Invite Christian 20s/30s to discern (and guide)

Ask, “God, would you prefer for that I commit to vocational singleness or get married?”

Accompany them or connect them with a spiritual director.

[Notes]
and finally, when Christians reach their 20s and 30s, invite them to discern and help guide their discernment

Invite them to ask, “God, would you prefer that I commit to vocational singleness or get married?”
if you feel confident to guide their discernment, you can be that person who accompanies them over 3+ years
as they explore those 5 ingredients for discernment

or you can connect them with a spiritual director
QUESTIONS?

Cautionary Tale?

???

[Notes]
Cautionary Tale

1 Timothy 5 describes a house of widows and the commitments to celibacy women have made. Remember that in Acts chapter 6, one of the first actions the newly formed Church took was to provide for the many single women who had become widows when their former husbands became Christians and divorced all of their wives but one. The Church saw it as their responsibility to provide housing, physical protection, sustenance, and opportunities to participate in the work of the Church. In 1 Corinthians 7:40 we hear Paul’s encouragement for these single women: “Yet in my judgment she is happier if she remains as she is.” Namely, to remain single and commit to vocational singleness. In 1 Timothy 5, then, we hear Paul’s judgment of widows who hastily discerned their call to vocational singleness, made a commitment to this house of widows, and then sought to be freed from their commitment. In verses 5 through 10 Paul describes model conduct for widows, including trusting God, faithfulness to her former husband, a track record of carrying for children, hospitality, etc. Then Paul suggests some new conditions for entrance into this community, most notably, that women be over 60 years old. Why? Because as Paul describes in verses 11-15, younger widows have been known to practice poor discernment of their calling, pledge celibacy without fully committing themselves to the vocation, allowing their sexual desires to overwhelm them, gossiping among the widows, breaking their pledge, and—in some cases—leaving the faith entirely. In light of these pattern among younger widows, he provides a practical suggestion for this specific community to refuse younger widows, and he gives the younger widows an allowance to break their first commitments to vocational singleness and marry.

A cursory reading of 1 Timothy 5 might suggest that only older Christians should commit to vocational singleness once they have no other options and that those committed to vocational singleness can break their commitment at any time without consequence. Quite the contrary. Paul encouragement for all Christians to consider vocational singleness has been made clear already. Nor does he give this allowance to break their first commitments lightly. This story is primarily a caution against poor discernment. Paul offers these two practical suggestions reluctantly because young widows have poorly discerned their vocation, failed to keep their vow, and committed serious sin by breaking their vow. It would have better for them to have first discerned marriage or kept their vow to a vocation of celibacy. 

Paul is commending that God’s best for those who have made a vow to marriage or celibacy is for them to keep their vow. Not doing so is a serious sin. Even if you married the wrong person, weren’t called to marriage at all, or weren’t called to celibacy. It is still serious sin. Will some of you remedy that by breaking your vow and sinning? Yes. I wish you wouldn’t, but I know some of you have been so reckless and careless in making your vows that there might be less sin by breaking your vows and living how God actually called you rather than honoring your vows. But, God would rather you honor your vows and fully commit yourself to walking them out faithfully.

St. Augustine confirms this understanding of 1 Timothy 5 when he says the following: “Once these and other vows have been pronounced, when they are made in the regular forms, they may on no condition be broken, because the resolution was made unconditionally. This is a commandment of the Lord; these words enable us to understand it: ‘Make your vows to the Lord your God, and perform them’ (Ps. 76:11). The apostle derives from this his judgement on some women who, having previously made a vow of continence, afterwards wish to marry, although they were perfectly free to marry before their vow; ‘They incur condemnation for having violated their first pledge’ (1 Tim 5:12).” Augustine makes clear that commitments to vocational singleness are meant to be kept, and breaking those commitments are a sin. Yet he recognizes that before their commitment, they were free to marry. What could have prevented these circumstances? Better discernment.

Why is it so important that we avoid poor discernment? Because the results can be painful. One of my closest friends married a man who failed to share his half-hearted commitment to marriage. Once the standard hardships of marriage and raising children set in, he started searching for a way out. He convinced himself that he married my friend under false pretenses, so it was okay in the eyes of God to get divorced. My friend resisted the request for divorce for years, but eventually she was compelled to comply. Today, her ex-husband is no longer a Christian, and she raises their two children alone. She loves her children, but she speaks honestly about her wish that she had discerned more carefully and never married her husband. She admits that she wanted to be married, and she married the first man who would say yes. By no means does she think her current hardship is some punishment for her poor discernment. But she will urge anyone considering marriage or committing to vocational singleness to discern carefully. If you don’t, the painful consequences can last a lifetime.
Public Commitments

Public commitments help family/friends take our commitments more seriously, leading to better support

Plus, public commitments strengthen the confidence and joy of the discerner.

[Notes]
When the Nashville Family of Brothers was first developing, my pastor encouraged us to make our first commitment publicly.

Why? Because he knew that our families and friends needed to see us making this commitment so that they would take our vocations more seriously.
He knew that they would realize the weight of our commitments and our need for support from them in the coming months and years.
And he knew that we needed a public celebration for the joy and weight of the commitments to settle in for us.

As I’ve made one-year and then three-year public commitments over my discernment, I’ve consistently seen this to be true.

What could this look like?

What is Christian discernment?

“…The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice…”
–John 10:1-5

[Notes]
John 10:1-5 says

“Very truly I tell you Pharisees, anyone who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in by some other way, is a thief and a robber. The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice. But they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger’s voice.”

What is Jesus describing here?
A shepherd who leads his sheep with his voice
Sheep who listen for the shepherd’s voice
Sheep who follow the shepherd’s voice

WHY?
BECAUSE THEY KNOW HIS VOICE

Discernment is all about knowing God’s voice
And then following it
we want to be the sheep who listen to the shepherd's voice and follow
There are lots of different Christian traditions of discernment, but the most robust and popular and concrete is Ignatian Discernment

[Notes]
My favorite, accessible book about Ignatian Christian discernment is God’s Voice Within by Mark Thibodeaux
A lot of what we’re talking about today is from this book

I highly recommend reading the book and digesting these ideas on your own time

What is Ignatian Discernment?

“…once a person can recognize the motivations moving her toward one particular choice or another, then…she simply chooses the options that comes from God…the tricky part is not in the act of choosing option A, B, or C but that in creating an internal skill (an Ignatian intuition) of recognizing the motives attracting and repulsing you toward or away from any given option.”

[Notes]
Here’s the authors summary of Ignatian Discernment:

"St. Ignatius of Loyola is one of Christianity's most important teachers of discernment. And yet, Ignatius himself did not write a systematic, step-by-step, follow-the-recipe sort of guide to making a decision. He knew that every decision carries with it so many variables that a cookie-cutter method would be contrived and clunky. Humans are simply too complex for a one-size-fits-all discernment manual.

Instead, Ignatius set out to teach people how to become a kind of person who, through a sort of learned intuition, could detect the sources of one's thoughts, emotions, and actions. Through that discernment of the sources, which he called the discernment of spirits, a person can determine God's will in any given situation. In other words, once a person can recognize the motivations moving her toward one particular choice or another, then the work of coming to a decision becomes easy: she simply chooses the options that comes from God. OK, maybe the choice still isn't always easy, but the point is that the tricky part is not in the act of choosing option A, B, or C but that in creating an internal skill--an Ignatian intuition--of recognizing the motives attracting and repulsing you toward or away from any given option."


God sometimes nudges us using our thoughts and feelings

But we must discern whether a nudge is truly from God, the Enemy, or ourselves

Requires spiritual health + practice discerning internal voices (aka self-awareness)
What is Ignatian Discernment?

[Notes]
To put it another way, St. Ignatius…
believed that God sometimes shares nudges with us toward the right things
but we have to figure what the nudge is, specifically
AND we have to distinguish between God, the Enemy, and ourselves
whether to trust the nudge or not

This requires general spiritual health
AND practice discerning and attuning oneself to God's voice and interpreting common emotional responses to God versus Enemy versus self
ALL ABOUT SELF-AWARENESS

but before discerning, we must determine whether we're even in a good emotional/mental/spiritual space to discern (and what to do about it)
Is it time to discern?
Feeling consolation?
Faith, hope, and love
Sense of God's closeness
Peace and Tranquility
Desire for the greater things
Transparent
Or desolation?
Empty of faith, hope, & love
God feels distant
Disquiet, agitated, and confused
Bored and tepid
Afraid, worried, & secretive
False positive (emotions)

[Notes]
are you generally feeling (consolation)
faith, hope, and love
“Faith: Did my actions today give me greater trust in God, in the Church, or in the God-given people 
of my life—or did they lead to unproductive and paralyzing doubts?” 
-  “Hope: Have the feelings I’ve been experiencing lately led me to greater optimism for the future and 
deeper confidence in God’s providence—or have they led to despair and to forgetting that God will 
take care of me, no matter what?” 
-  “Love: Have the things that have preoccupied my thoughts today really led me to greater love of my 
neighbor—or have those thoughts coaxed me into isolation, secrecy, passivity, or aggressiveness?” 

sense of God's closeness

peace and tranquility
“...the peace of consolation is the state of being at peace specifically about the various agitations and temptations of my life. This peace isn’t a peace without problems, agitations, and so on, It isn’t even peace despite problems. It is a divine peace about those difficult, unresolved issues of my life.” 

desiring the greater things
transparency

or are you feeling (desolation)

empty of faith, hope, and love

God feels distant

disquiet and agitated
“...the negative feelings of fear, anger, and laziness will bother me and seem larger than they really 
are.” 

Confusion
“Confusion becomes a desolating experience when we allow ourselves to be upset about not knowing—when our uncertainty or lack of knowledge leads to disturbance within us.” 

boredom and tepidity
Our lack of love for God leads to an apathy or lack of desire to be close to God 

fear and worry

Secrecy
“Ignatius warns against the false spirit’s trick of getting me to keep things secret from my mentors 
and companions... When I am in desolation, I cannot trust my own judgment.” 

false positive (emotions)
“...the experience of being drawn to feelings, thoughts, and motivations that look god and holy at first but ultimately lead to actions to which God is not calling that person, or not calling that person to at that time." 
When in desolation…

Name it
Don’t make changes/decisions
Rely on your support network
Address sources of desolation
Be gentle, patient, and encouraging with yourself
Have faith that God will make good use of this time

[Notes]
When in desolation

name it

don't make changes/decisions

rely on your support network

address sources of desolation/problems
God never causes desolation, but He does permit it to come. There are three causes of desolation: logistical, moral, and psychological. Only one of those implies culpability on our part. “It’s important to note that if I am in desolation I should not presume that it is my fault. On the contrary, for a devout Christian, desolation does not usually come because of sin.” 
-  “If sin is not the culprit for desolation, perhaps the problem lies with some logistical detail...Often making a simple adjustment regarding when, where, or how long I pray [or order my life in other ways] will do the trick.” 
-  “Perhaps the roots of the desolation are psychological rather than spiritual." 

be gentle, patient, and encouraging with yourself

have faith that God will make good use of this time
“Desolation, however, is not a wasted period. It’s an opportunity to receive the more difficult graces 
that can come only through a bit of suffering...Ignatius suggests three difficult graces in particular that the desolate one has the potential of receiving: repentance, fortitude, and humility. I would suggest others as well: patience, trust, self-assurance, self-confidence, wisdom, and unwavering loyalty toward God and toward Christian commitments.” 

if you’re in consolation, let's discern!
A good foundation

Center discernment on the big question: What do I seek?
Practice gratitude
Ask, “Do I want God’s greater glory?”
Ask, “Am I open-handed and desire to receive what God says is best?”

[Notes]
Just before discerning, let’s establish a good foundation

when you're ready to discern: center all discernment on the big questions, "What do I seek?”
Consider your life mission statement, and if you don’t have one, consider entering into a process to
discover your life mission statement. What is the purpose of life? What is the purpose of MY life? What is it that gets me out of bed every morning? When I am old and near death, what sort of life would I be proud and happy to look back on?

practice gratitude
do I want God's greater glory?
Once a person names that greatest desire of all, she then finds herself ready to give up whatever 
does not lead to the glory of God and ready to take on whatever will lead to the greater glory of 
God.

am I open-handed and believe that whatever God's nudges will be best?
the grace-filled state of desiring to do God’s will and to praise, reverence, and serve God more than desiring anything else. The state of grateful availability.” 

When indifference of the heart is difficult...- “...in any given moment of discernment, I amy not have the feelings of indifference but nevertheless 

willfully choose the path of indifference...With my own will, I make a choice to ground myself in that deeper desire for God’s greater glory rather than in any superficial inclination..." 
Let’s discern!

Get quiet
Gather data
Dream about possibilities
Weigh God’s voice in those dreams

[Notes]
Next, we discern

get quiet
Prepare yourself to receive and consider by being silent and aligning your will to God’s in prayer 

gather data
(before dealing with the emotions, break it down logically. cut out the fat. clarify what your real questions and real feelings are. clean out the distractions. using reason, purify and distill what's going on)

dream about possibilities/options
Fantasize about great and beautiful futures. I let God dream in me, and I sit in silent awe and wonder as these holy dreams come to life before the eyes and ears of my soul. 

weigh how each dream made you feel
Remember those characteristics of God’s nudge versus other voices?



Weighing God’s voice

God’s nudge?
Faith, hope, and love
Sense of God's closeness
Peace and Tranquility
Desire for the greater things
Transparent
Another voice?
Empty of faith, hope, & love
God feels distant
Disquiet, agitated, and confused
Bored and tepid
Afraid, worried, & secretive
False positive (emotions)

[Notes]
Which of these dreams leave me dry and sad, despite my best efforts to create a dream of great 
possibility? In which dreams have I found pleasure that lingers, even long after the dream ends.” 

-  Which dreams leave me in consolation? Which dreams leave me in desolation? 

-  “Note that I am searching for the deep-down peace, as opposed to simply feeling comfortable with 
the option." 

Let’s discern!

Get quiet
Gather data
Dream about possibilities
Weigh God’s voice in those dreams

[Notes]
“When the Soul is not acted on by various spirits” 

-  “Sometimes, in a life of discernment, there is no strong sense of the spirits within...In such circumstances, Ignatius says that we must rely on our natural senses of reason and judgment.” 

 Make a list of pros and cons, imagine what advice you would give yourself, etc. “Without being able to doubt” 

“...the special case of having an unmistakable attraction to one option is an even rarer occurrence. 

Most of the time, we will discern in the usual way of pondering the praydreams and comparing their accompanying inner movements to the characteristics of desolation and consolation.” 

After discerning

Offer my tentative decision to God
Seek confirmation through small steps
What if there is no confirmation?
Step out in faith and decide

[Notes]
MOST OF THE TIME JUST A HUNCH
So what next?

offer to God
Set aside some time to offer your tentative decision to God in prayer. Invite God to make it clear 
that this is not the right decision for you. 

seek confirmation through small steps

What if there is no confirmation?
- “Although my discouragement or frustration may tempt me to think that I’ve done a poor job at
discerning, that may not be the case at all. I may well have done everything correctly and still arrive
at the point of disconfirmation.”

- You may respond by allowing more time for confirmation to come, by reconsidering other options,
by beginning your discernment process anew, or by relying on your reasoning skills to confirm the
decision.

Making the final decision and acting on it 
-  “When this moment finally comes, I should act decisively, with the wind—the breath of God!—at my back.” 
-  Beware of the false spirit and strengthen your decision with a pledge 
4 Reminders

The bigger the decision, the more thorough the process 
Everyone has buyer’s remorse 
We rarely have certainty 
Trust that God will make good of any sincere choice

[Notes]
Four things to remember... 

The bigger the decision, the more thorough the process 

Everyone has buyer’s remorse 

We rarely have certainty 

Trust that God will make good of any sincere choice 

Webinar Key Questions

Why discern God’s calling to vocational singleness or Christian marriage?
How can we discern, generally?
How does one specifically discern between vocational singleness and Christian marriage?
How can pastors and parents help Christians discern well?

[Notes]
How do we apply general Christian discernment specifically to the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage?

DiscerningSingleness& Marriage

