

DISCERNING
Singleness & Marriage



Safe Space 
Confidential Space 
Listening Space




Small group values

[Notes]
respect each other’s perspectives



Singleness & Marriage



Why discern God’s calling to singleness or marriage?
How can we practice Ignatian discernment?
How does one specifically discern singleness and marriage?
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS

[Notes]
I WILL PROVIDE NOTES

SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS



Share



Before this class, what has your exposure to discernment been, generally, and specifically applied to the question of singleness or marriage?

What questions do you hope to answer?

[Notes]
Is a life of singleness a response to unwanted SSA or a call separate from that?
Do gay people really need to discern? What are the consequences of Side B gay people defaulting to celibacy?
What does a commitment look like? How do we know it took?
How do we get confidence?
What happens if you bail?
What about the other two categories of eunuchs?


WHY DISCERN?







All first called to temporary singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to vocational singleness
Others called to Christian marriage
Why discern?

[Notes]
Here’s a summary of how Christians have historically understood the Bible to teach about sexual stewardship—about the options available to Christians and how we carefully discern with God how to steward our capacities for connect and make wise decisions about our needs for healthy intimacy

This is the big picture for what it looks like to faithfully, in God-honoring ways, steward our sexualities

We are all first called to temporary singleness (that’s the singleness we’re born into) and discern whether God is calling us to Christian marriage or to vocational singleness (a lifetime commitment to celibate singleness for the sake of the kingdom)
I will provide more evidence for this distinction between temporary and vocational singleness later and what diff that makes






Christian vocation - a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
Why discern?

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation? Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children (you may disagree with that definition, that’s okay)






Why discern?

[Notes]
Here’s a representation of those same idea in a diagram
As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of languishing in temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

I want to sit here a second
These distinctions were mind-blowing for me when they first became clear from Scripture and Teachings of the Church
None of us on a default path
Not supposed to just take what we want
Shouldn’t continue in the limbo of uncommitted singleness
Two options
Both equal and good and normal but one more common
Need to ask God which He wants me to do
I won’t get the gift from God to do either well until I step out of temporary singleness and COMMIT








Jesus raises the marriage standard
Disciples sardonically suggest lifetime singleness
Jesus: only those whom God gives either marriage or lifetime singleness can accept his teaching, respectively
Scripture: Matt 19

[Notes]
Okay so why discern?
Well, let’s start with scripture

Go pull up the verses on another window

Background: procreation mandate, procreation fulfilled Old Covenant, barrenness and celibacy seen as curse and sin
Also, disciples were teens and just about the age when EVERYONE got married

When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan. 2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.

3 Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”

4 “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’[a] 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’[b]? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”

7 “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”

Okay so what’s going on here? Competing camps are trying to trip him up by asking him to choose a side on divorce

8 Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. 9 I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”

Jesus raising the marriage standard
He calls them back to lifetime monogamy (that exception…)
More conservative than either camp

10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”

This standard was laughably high for the disciples, so they respond with a bitterly sarcastic joke
Lost on modern audience because we don’t see celibacy as a curse like they did
But they are suggesting passing on getting married when everyone else would, which would mean they would never marry, and volitionally being celibate and without children for a lifetime
Would made more sense to us today if they had said “If marriage is really lifelong with only one person, it’d be better for me to mutilate my genitals.”

11 Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”

In v 11 he’s referring to his high standard of marriage
Not everyone can accept this standard
But only those to whom the gift of marriage has been given

Then in v 12, Jesus says that there are others who are called to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom
Not everyone can accept this teaching either
Only those who have been called to it

What does he mean by “eunuch”
Lifetime
Built up the king’s kingdom
Lived in the king’s palace, honored
So we’re talking about a permanent calling of singleness for the kingdom

What do you notice about both marriage and vocational singleness?
They are called and the gift involved a capacity to accept Christ’s high teachings










God gives vocational singleness to some, Christian marriage to others
Committing to either without the gift is dangerous
Better to remain in vocational singleness X4
Scripture: 1 Cor 7

[Notes]
Then there’s 1 Cor 7
We’re going to move through this one more quickly

Now for the matters you wrote about: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.” 2 But since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife, and each woman with her own husband. 3 The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband. 4 The wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband. In the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife. 5 Do not deprive each other except perhaps by mutual consent and for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer. Then come together again so that Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. 6 I say this as a concession, not as a command.

In brief, calling married people to faithful monogamy

7 I wish that all of you were as I am. But each of you has your own gift from God; one has this gift, another has that.

Paul was permanently celibate after his conversion
He prefers vocational singleness, wishing all were called to it, but
Each has his own gift from God
The gift is from God
He gives the gift
God doesn’t offer each of us both gifts
He offers one to some, and the other to others

8 Now to the unmarried[a] and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do.

Second time Paul shows his preference for lifetime vocational singleness

9 But if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.

A common misinterpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:9 is that poor sexual stewardship in singleness shows that one has not been given the gift of singleness and should instead marry.
Now, it’s more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
MARRIAGE IS NOT A REMEDY FOR WEAKNESS (hurts women+kids and violates the testimony of marriage)

For the sake of time, I’m gonna skip verses 10 - 24
10 To the married I give this command (not I, but the Lord): A wife must not separate from her husband. 11 But if she does, she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband. And a husband must not divorce his wife.

12 To the rest I say this (I, not the Lord): If any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her. 13 And if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is willing to live with her, she must not divorce him. 14 For the unbelieving husband has been sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified through her believing husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.

15 But if the unbeliever leaves, let it be so. The brother or the sister is not bound in such circumstances; God has called us to live in peace. 16 How do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or, how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?

Concerning Change of Status

17 Nevertheless, each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the Lord has assigned to them, just as God has called them. This is the rule I lay down in all the churches. 18 Was a man already circumcised when he was called? He should not become uncircumcised. Was a man uncircumcised when he was called? He should not be circumcised. 19 Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. Keeping God’s commands is what counts. 20 Each person should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.

21 Were you a slave when you were called? Don’t let it trouble you—although if you can gain your freedom, do so. 22 For the one who was a slave when called to faith in the Lord is the Lord’s freed person; similarly, the one who was free when called is Christ’s slave. 23 You were bought at a price; do not become slaves of human beings. 24 Brothers and sisters, each person, as responsible to God, should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.

Concerning the Unmarried

25 Now about virgins: I have no command from the Lord, but I give a judgment as one who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy. 26 Because of the present crisis, I think that it is good for a man to remain as he is. 27 Are you pledged to a woman? Do not seek to be released. Are you free from such a commitment? Do not look for a wife. 28 But if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and I want to spare you this.

29 What I mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short. From now on those who have wives should live as if they do not; 30 those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep; 31 those who use the things of the world, as if not engrossed in them. For this world in its present form is passing away.

”present crisis” or “present age” consistently interpreted as the age after Christ and before Christ’s return
Not referring to a narrower time
Today no less tumultuous

Here’s the 3rd recommendation to remain in permanent vocational singleness

32 I would like you to be free from concern. An unmarried man is concerned about the Lord’s affairs—how he can please the Lord. 33 But a married man is concerned about the affairs of this world—how he can please his wife— 34 and his interests are divided. An unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the Lord’s affairs: Her aim is to be devoted to the Lord in both body and spirit. But a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world—how she can please her husband. 35 I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord.

The point of vocational singleness is to serve God with undivided devotion

36 If anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to, and if his passions are too strong[b] and he feels he ought to marry, he should do as he wants. He is not sinning. They should get married. 37 But the man who has settled the matter in his own mind, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin—this man also does the right thing. 38 So then, he who marries the virgin does right, but he who does not marry her does better.[c]

Complicated passage, but most historical and robust interpretation that it’s referring to early Church practical of spiritual betrothal

39 A woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, but he must belong to the Lord. 40 In my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is—and I think that I too have the Spirit of God.

And here’s our 4th recommendation to remain in permanent vocational singleness

So there’s a lot going on there
To recap, Paul said God calls some to vocational singleness and some to marriage
And Paul praises lifetime vocational singleness

How do we know Jesus and Paul were talking about permanent singleness?
unanimous understanding of the early Church






God has a preference/calling that He wants to share
Both involve a gift received at commitment
Both vocational singleness and Christian marriage are permanent
Why discern?

[Notes]
Okay, so why discern?

1. God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
And this makes sense, certainly God can imagine all of our possible futures and tell each of us personally whether singleness or marriage will lead to more goodness for us and more glory for God

2. Both vocations involve a gift to accept the teachings and the call, and a gift in response to accepting the call to do it well, a provision of grace (more later on why we need this)

3. God intended for Christian marriage and vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
We’ve already heard the evidence from Matt 19 + 1 Cor 7 and the unanimous understanding of the early Church
If we needed any more…
We cannot imagine Jesus providing the 100-fold blessing promised in Luke 18:28-30 to someone who has only temporarily given up the prospect of marriage and children, only to later get married.
Then in 1 Timothy 5:5-15, Paul reaffirms that a commitment to vocational singleness is good and to break that commitment is a sin.







Temporary singleness not mentioned or gifted
There is no default path
Unwise to unthinkingly take what we want
Why discern?

[Notes]
4. temporary singleness not mentioned or gifted
Show me a verse that commends temporary singleness or speaks for a gift for it

5. no default path
We’re obviously not born into committed celibacy or Christian marriage
Both Matt 19 and 1 Cor 7 speak about intentionally stepping into one or another and caution against do so lightly

6. doesn't seem like we just get to take what we want
Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires







Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.
Why discern?

[Notes]
is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no
but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, Max Thurian, and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift, if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly
how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?
DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness. And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference







Why not just continue in temporary singleness?
I want to marry and be a parent, so that must be God’s desires…
Lifetime singleness is more natural than lifetime faithful monogamy
Reasonable objections

[Notes]
I want to address some reasonable objections

Why not just continue in temporary singleness? What difference does it really make? 
Well, there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

Additionally, those who continue indefinitely in temporary singleness are likely to be shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and uncommitted to the kingdom work they’re doing because they have to stay prepared to reorganize their lives around a (potential) spouse at any moment.

Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage Christians to consider celibacy aren’t commending temporary singleness—they’re commending committed, lifetime singleness.

In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.
So if someone is in temporary singleness, without the gift of singleness, and struggling, perhaps part of the difficult is that they haven’t receive the gift yet

That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness. For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage in their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life. While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.   

2. i want to marry, be a parent, so that must be God's desires...
Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire for marriage, sex, and children before committing to singleness for the Lord, so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference. 

3. singleness is too difficult and isn't natural...

Well, not quite
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness






But Jesus says “choose” in Matt 19:12
What are the consequences of not discerning or ignoring God’s call?
Why discern if one is much more common?
Reasonable objections


[Notes]
4. But in Matt 19:12, doesn’t Jesus say “choose” to live like a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom?

Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?
Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into vocational singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.
Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.


5. what if we ignore God's preference or never seek it? consequences of not discerning?
I don’t think God is going to strike down someone’s marriage or celibacy, even if it wasn’t His best
I think God wants us to be faithful to our commitments and He will provide the gift of grace to do it well
But for some, maybe the reasons things are difficult is because it wasn’t God’s best path for them


6. why discern if one is much less common?
90% is pretty good odds
But if we all assume marriage
90% will take it for granted, assume they are owed it, not see it as a gift, now own the responsibility
And the 10% will feel cheated
100% of people open-handedly discerning will lead to 100% of people joyfully accepting God’s call and faithfully walking it out



Share



Are you convinced?
Why or why not?
What objections or hesitations linger?



Singleness & Marriage



Why discern God’s calling to singleness or marriage?
How can we practice Ignatian discernment?
How does one specifically discern singleness and marriage?
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS

[Notes]
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS


DISCERNING
Singleness & Marriage



Singleness & Marriage



Why discern God’s calling to singleness or marriage?
How can we practice Ignatian discernment?
How does one specifically discern singleness and marriage?
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS

[Notes]
before we discern specifically between singleness and marriage, we need to make sure we've built up our spiritual muscles for general Christian discernment


SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS






“…The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice…”
–John 10:1-5
Christian Discernment

[Notes]
John 10:1-5 says

“Very truly I tell you Pharisees, anyone who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in by some other way, is a thief and a robber. The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice. But they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger’s voice.”

What is Jesus describing here?
A shepherd who leads his sheep with his voice
Sheep who listen for the shepherd’s voice
Sheep who follow the shepherd’s voice
WHY?
BECAUSE THEY KNOW HIS VOICE

Discernment is all about knowing God’s voice
And then following it
we want to be the sheep who listen to the shepherd's voice and follow
There are lots of different Christian traditions of discernment, but the most robust and popular and concrete is Ignatian Discernment







[Notes]
My favorite, accessible book about Ignatian Christian discernment is God’s Voice Within by Mark Thibodeaux
A lot of what we’re talking about today is from this book

I highly recommend reading the book and digesting these ideas on your own time






“…once a person can recognize the motivations moving her toward one particular choice or another, then…she simply chooses the options that comes from God…the tricky part is not in the act of choosing option A, B, or C but that in creating an internal skill (an Ignatian intuition) of recognizing the motives attracting and repulsing you toward or away from any given option.”
Ignatian Discernment

[Notes]
Here’s the authors summary of Ignatian Discernment:

"St. Ignatius of Loyola is one of Christianity's most important teachers of discernment. And yet, Ignatius himself did not write a systematic, step-by-step, follow-the-recipe sort of guide to making a decision. He knew that every decision carries with it so many variables that a cookie-cutter method would be contrived and clunky. Humans are simply too complex for a one-size-fits-all discernment manual.

Instead, Ignatius set out to teach people how to become a kind of person who, through a sort of learned intuition, could detect the sources of one's thoughts, emotions, and actions. Through that discernment of the sources, which he called the discernment of spirits, a person can determine God's will in any given situation. In other words, once a person can recognize the motivations moving her toward one particular choice or another, then the work of coming to a decision becomes easy: she simply chooses the options that comes from God. OK, maybe the choice still isn't always easy, but the point is that the tricky part is not in the act of choosing option A, B, or C but that in creating an internal skill--an Ignatian intuition--of recognizing the motives attracting and repulsing you toward or away from any given option."






God sometimes nudges us using our thoughts and feelings
But we must discern whether a nudge is truly from God, the Enemy, or ourselves
Requires spiritual health + practice discerning internal voices (aka self-awareness)

Ignatian Discernment

[Notes]
To put it another way, St. Ignatius…
believed that God sometimes shares nudges with us toward the right things
but we have to figure what the nudge is, specifically
AND we have to distinguish between God, the Enemy, and ourselves
whether to trust the nudge or not

This requires general spiritual health
AND practice discerning and attuning oneself to God's voice and interpreting common emotional responses to God versus Enemy versus self
ALL ABOUT SELF-AWARENESS

but before discerning, we must determine whether we're even in a good emotional/mental/spiritual space to discern (and what to do about it)






Feeling consolation?
Faith, hope, and love
Sense of God's closeness
Peace and Tranquility
Desire for the greater things
Transparent
Is it time to discern?
Or desolation?
Empty of faith, hope, and love
God feels distant
Disquiet, agitated, and confused
Bored and tepid
Afraid, worried, and secretive
False positive (emotions)

[Notes]
are you generally feeling (consolation)
faith, hope, and love

“Faith: Did my actions today give me greater trust in God, in the Church, or in the God-given people 
of my life—or did they lead to unproductive and paralyzing doubts?” 
-  “Hope: Have the feelings I’ve been experiencing lately led me to greater optimism for the future and 
deeper confidence in God’s providence—or have they led to despair and to forgetting that God will 
take care of me, no matter what?” 
-  “Love: Have the things that have preoccupied my thoughts today really led me to greater love of my 
neighbor—or have those thoughts coaxed me into isolation, secrecy, passivity, or aggressiveness?” 

sense of God's closeness
peace and tranquility

“...the peace of consolation is the state of being at peace specifically about the various agitations and temptations of my life. This peace isn’t a peace without problems, agitations, and so on, It isn’t even peace despite problems. It is a divine peace about those difficult, unresolved issues of my life.” 

desiring the greater things
transparency

or are you feeling (desolation)
empty of faith, hope, and love
God feels distant
disquiet and agitated

“...the negative feelings of fear, anger, and laziness will bother me and seem larger than they really 
are.” 

Confusion

“Confusion becomes a desolating experience when we allow ourselves to be upset about not knowing—when our uncertainty or lack of knowledge leads to disturbance within us.” 

boredom and tepidity

Our lack of love for God leads to an apathy or lack of desire to be close to God 

fear and worry
Secrecy

“Ignatius warns against the false spirit’s trick of getting me to keep things secret from my mentors 
and companions... When I am in desolation, I cannot trust my own judgment.” 

false positive (emotions)

“...the experience of being drawn to feelings, thoughts, and motivations that look god and holy at first but ultimately lead to actions to which God is not calling that person, or not calling that person to at that time." 








Name it
Don’t make changes/decisions
Rely on your support network
Address sources of desolation
Be gentle, patient, and encouraging with yourself
Have faith that God will make good use of this time
When in desolation…

[Notes]
When in desolation
name it
don't make changes/decisions
rely on your support network
address sources of desolation/problems

God never causes desolation, but He does permit it to come. There are three causes of desolation: logistical, moral, and psychological. Only one of those implies culpability on our part. “It’s important to note that if I am in desolation I should not presume that it is my fault. On the contrary, for a devout Christian, desolation does not usually come because of sin.” 
-  “If sin is not the culprit for desolation, perhaps the problem lies with some logistical detail...Often making a simple adjustment regarding when, where, or how long I pray [or order my life in other ways] will do the trick.” 
-  “Perhaps the roots of the desolation are psychological rather than spiritual." 

be gentle, patient, and encouraging with yourself
have faith that God will make good use of this time

“Desolation, however, is not a wasted period. It’s an opportunity to receive the more difficult graces 
that can come only through a bit of suffering...Ignatius suggests three difficult graces in particular that the desolate one has the potential of receiving: repentance, fortitude, and humility. I would suggest others as well: patience, trust, self-assurance, self-confidence, wisdom, and unwavering loyalty toward God and toward Christian commitments.” 

if you’re in consolation, let's discern!



Share



Which of these might you already recognize or practice, but by another name?






Center discernment on the big question: What do I seek?
Practice gratitude
Ask, “Do I want God’s greater glory?”
Ask, “Am I open-handed and desire to receive what God says is best?”
A good foundation

[Notes]
Just before discerning, let’s establish a good foundation

when you're ready to discern: center all discernment on the big questions, "What do I seek?”

Consider your life mission statement, and if you don’t have one, consider entering into a process to
discover your life mission statement. What is the purpose of life? What is the purpose of MY life? What is it that gets me out of bed every morning? When I am old and near death, what sort of life would I be proud and happy to look back on?

practice gratitude
do I want God's greater glory?

Once a person names that greatest desire of all, she then finds herself ready to give up whatever 
does not lead to the glory of God and ready to take on whatever will lead to the greater glory of 
God.

am I open-handed and believe that whatever God's nudges will be best?

the grace-filled state of desiring to do God’s will and to praise, reverence, and serve God more than desiring anything else. The state of grateful availability.” 

When indifference of the heart is difficult...- “...in any given moment of discernment, I amy not have the feelings of indifference but nevertheless 
willfully choose the path of indifference...With my own will, I make a choice to ground myself in that deeper desire for God’s greater glory rather than in any superficial inclination..." 







Get quiet
Gather data
Dream about possibilities
Weigh God’s voice in those dreams
Let’s discern!

[Notes]
Next, we discern

get quiet

Prepare yourself to receive and consider by being silent and aligning your will to God’s in prayer 

gather data
(before dealing with the emotions, break it down logically. cut out the fat. clarify what your real questions and real feelings are. clean out the distractions. using reason, purify and distill what's going on)

dream about possibilities/options

Fantasize about great and beautiful futures. I let God dream in me, and I sit in silent awe and wonder as these holy dreams come to life before the eyes and ears of my soul. 

weigh how each dream made you feel
Remember those characteristics of God’s nudge versus other voices?







God’s nudge?
Faith, hope, and love
Sense of God's closeness
Peace and Tranquility
Desire for the greater things
Transparent
Weighing God’s voice
Another voice?
Empty of faith, hope, and love
God feels distant
Disquiet, agitated, and confused
Bored and tepid
Afraid, worried, and secretive
False positive (emotions)

[Notes]
Which of these dreams leave me dry and sad, despite my best efforts to create a dream of great 
possibility? In which dreams have I found pleasure that lingers, even long after the dream ends.” 
-  Which dreams leave me in consolation? Which dreams leave me in desolation? 
-  “Note that I am searching for the deep-down peace, as opposed to simply feeling comfortable with 
the option." 






Get quiet
Gather data
Dream about possibilities
Weigh God’s voice in those dreams
Let’s discern!

[Notes]
“When the Soul is not acted on by various spirits” 
-  “Sometimes, in a life of discernment, there is no strong sense of the spirits within...In such circumstances, Ignatius says that we must rely on our natural senses of reason and judgment.” 
 Make a list of pros and cons, imagine what advice you would give yourself, etc. “Without being able to doubt” 

“...the special case of having an unmistakable attraction to one option is an even rarer occurrence. 
Most of the time, we will discern in the usual way of pondering the praydreams and comparing their accompanying inner movements to the characteristics of desolation and consolation.” 



Share



Gather data, dream dreams, and weigh God’s voice. Simple yet robust? Or too simple?






Offer my tentative decision to God
Seek confirmation through small steps
What if there is no confirmation?
Step out in faith and decide
After discerning

[Notes]
MOST OF THE TIME JUST A HUNCH
So what next?

offer to God

Set aside some time to offer your tentative decision to God in prayer. Invite God to make it clear 
that this is not the right decision for you. 

seek confirmation through small steps

What if there is no confirmation?
- “Although my discouragement or frustration may tempt me to think that I’ve done a poor job at
discerning, that may not be the case at all. I may well have done everything correctly and still arrive
at the point of disconfirmation.”
- You may respond by allowing more time for confirmation to come, by reconsidering other options,
by beginning your discernment process anew, or by relying on your reasoning skills to confirm the
decision.

Making the final decision and acting on it 
-  “When this moment finally comes, I should act decisively, with the wind—the breath of God!—at my back.” 
-  Beware of the false spirit and strengthen your decision with a pledge 







The bigger the decision, the more thorough the process 
Everyone has buyer’s remorse 
We rarely have certainty 
Trust that God will make good of any sincere choice
4 Reminders

[Notes]
Four things to remember... 
The bigger the decision, the more thorough the process 
Everyone has buyer’s remorse 
We rarely have certainty 
Trust that God will make good of any sincere choice 



Share



Lingering thoughts? Questions?



Singleness & Marriage



Why discern God’s calling to singleness or marriage?
How can we practice Ignatian discernment?
How does one specifically discern singleness and marriage?
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS

[Notes]
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS


DISCERNING
Singleness & Marriage



Singleness & Marriage



Why discern God’s calling to singleness or marriage?
How can we practice Ignatian discernment?
How does one specifically discern singleness and marriage?
SUBMIT YOUR QUESTIONS

[Notes]
How do we apply general Christian discernment specifically to the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage?






Was I in desolation or consolation?
Clarity of purpose + indifference
Confirming experiences
My Discernment Story

[Notes]
Part of my process of discerning between vocational singleness and marriage was honesty with myself about the desolation in my life and what the false spirit might be pulling me away from. I knew I was discerning in a time of desolation—I was 6 years into a still-ongoing dark night of the soul that led to unstable faith, hope, and love. Already I knew this wasn’t an ideal state in which to discern and I was wary of my vulnerability to false spirits. I recognized my desire to control my future, my fear of going without a vocation. I was afraid of waking up twenty years into a marriage and feeling stuck. I noticed plenty of false consolation in my life—busying myself with work and caring for others that were good but had the potential of being distractions from the best things God wanted me to consider. Unsurprising to my friends, I experienced a fear of being misled by the false spirit, and I didn’t know how to categorize my meta musings. Nonetheless, an honest assessment of the desolation was key to my discernment. It created space to then look at sources of consolation

As I examined my own heart, I was relieved to find consolation and the feeling that the true spirit was indeed pulling me toward vocational singleness. When I looked more deeply at my anger and fear, instead of seeing disruption of my life, I saw a renewed commitment to seeking justice and truth. In response to hardship I was leaning on God and others more, and I recognized these as seeds of faith, hope, and love instead of desolation. Perhaps I was actually in a season of consolation, despite the challenges in my life, and I could trust my discernment. I saw a courage and great desires to bring goodness to the lives of others and a willingness to walk out vocational singleness, even if the path was difficult. Finally, I saw my fear of being led away by the false spirit as a desire for transparency. I wanted to discern carefully, and the consolation leading my discernment was evidenced in my willingness to share honestly with myself and others about thoughts and feelings that came up in my process, regardless of how they might make me look or where they might lead. So, what next?

At the end of my first year of intentional discernment, I felt a vague pull toward singleness for the Lord and away from marriage. To gain further clarity, I needed a way to organize my thoughts, a way to sift through the jumbled mess in my head and heart. I leaned into the process offered by Ignatian discernment. Thibodeaux stages wise discernment along three phases: laying a good foundation for decision-making, discerning wisely, and then seeking confirmation.

As I asked these questions of myself, I experienced clarity and gratitude. Over the past decade, I had gained clarity about God’s purpose for my life—something few of my peers have experience and something I know to count as a blessing. I knew that God made me to help the Church become a place where LGBT+ people could belong and thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic. No matter how many disappointing reactions from pastors, how many stories of pain I heard from other LGBT+ people, or how many hours of monotonous fundraising tasks, I was eager to get out of bed in the morning to do this work. I was also self-aware of my biases against both marriage and vocational singleness, which allowed me to identify them and address them. In time, I clear those biases from my heart and mind, and I arrived at a point where I could honestly tell God, “I’ve got a preference, I am cool with whichever path you have for me.”

Gathering data came easily to me—I’m a scientist and therapist by training. My life experiences and desires both pointed me toward vocational singleness. I seemed to possess an uncommon willingness to accept the call of celibacy, and God had stoked in me a deep desire for the Church to better teach about and support vocational singleness. Plus, celibacy would create the space in my life to do the kind of work I felt called to. At the end of my second year of discernment, I was 70% confident that God was calling me to lifetime singleness. Then two moments at the end of year three bumped my confidence meter from 95% to 100%:
 
The first was with my small group at church. We had spent half a year focused on the idea of discernment—what providence! Each week, a different person would share a question he or she was discerning, provide additional information about the person’s current discernment, lead us in a time of prayer to hear anything the Holy Spirit wanted us to receive, and then invite the rest of the group to share any spiritual wisdom or practical advice. When my night came, I knew what question I would ask: Am I called to marriage or vocational singleness? I shared with the group about what I had read, why I felt personally called to singleness for the Lord, and the questions that still lingered for me. We prayed. And then for the next half hour, each of the people in my small group shared their confidence that God was indeed calling me to singleness. They spoke about the joy my story and work brought them and how my testimony challenged them to think more carefully about their own sexual stewardship.
 
Then just a few weeks later, I went to dinner with a woman I met through work. This was in zero ways a date, but as the dinner progressed, I found myself drawn to her. Her personality was refreshingly honest and witty. She too was gay and committed to a traditional sexual ethic. I was struck by her natural beauty. Once again, I was confused. Women infrequently affect me this way, and just after the time with my small group that seemed to confirm my calling to singleness. After dinner I sat in my car working through the dilemma in my head, and I started having a conversation with God. I’m not saying that I audibly heard God. I didn’t. But sometimes I imagine asking God a question and I predict His answer based on what I know of God’s character. Most of the time this is just an imaginative way to apply the Bible to specific circumstances. But occasionally, the responses I come up with feel like they have more weight—like the Holy Spirit is saying, “Listen to that!” This “conversation” with God in the car after dinner with the interesting woman was one of those times:
 
Pieter: God, I’m so confused. First you seem to push me toward singleness. Now you seem to be pushing me toward marriage. Which is it? Would it really be good for me if I married someone like Emily?
God: Yes, it would be good.
Pieter: But then I couldn’t experience the awesome, unique aspects of singleness for the Lord. Would that singleness be good for me?
God: Yes, that would be good, too.
Pieter: So what should I do? If I choose the wrong one, would that ruin my life?
God: No, both would be good for you.
Pieter: But is one of them better for me? More great?
God: Yes. Marriage would be good and beautiful for you. But singleness for the kingdom would be even better. You can do either. You choose.
Pieter: Okay, then I choose singleness.
 
After that last statement, I felt a profound peace. Like stepping into the shower already set to the perfect temperature or admiring the lines in the grass of a freshly cut lawn. I knew that that choice of singleness fit for me. After years of searching, I knew the answer. God preferred for me to be single for Him, and I was ready to say “yes!”
 
The confirming experiences on the quasi-date with the woman and discernment conversation with my small group came shortly after offering my decisions to God tentatively. Eventually, I reached a point of confidence about my vocation, but it wasn’t quick or born out of some undeniable emotions. The evidence lined up, I took steps, experiences confirmed my hunch, and I enjoyed increased joy as I dreamed about a life of helping the Church and offering family to other celibate people. 








“[A] vocation is revealed by the light of the Holy Spirit which creates peace and joy; by a man’s past life and present circumstances interpreted as signs of God’s providence; in the act of faith and the self-commitment based on the Word of God; and by the counsel of the Church, which gives by the laying-on of hands the seal of God on the choice of man and the power of the Holy Spirit which enables him to remain faithful.” 
Discernment

[Notes]
How do we apply Ignatian Discernment to the specific question of marriage or celibacy? What specific data do we need to gather for this question? What resources can we seek?
 
As I read through God’s Voice Within and enjoyed Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy soon after, I realized that the process of discernment I had cobbled together over the past few years wasn’t an accident or anything new. The Holy Spirit had been guiding me along a process of discerning one’s relational vocation discovered long ago in Ignatian Discernment and applied to this specific question by wise theologians like Max Thurian. He gives this summary of discernment:
 
“[A] vocation is revealed by the light of the Holy Spirit which creates peace and joy; by a man’s past life and present circumstances interpreted as signs of God’s providence; in the act of faith and the self-commitment based on the Word of God; and by the counsel of the Church, which gives by the laying-on of hands the seal of God on the choice of man and the power of the Holy Spirit which enables him to remain faithful.”








5 Ingredients for Wise Discernment
Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
Discernment

[Notes]
I can’t take any credit for what follows—I merely stumbled upon ancient wisdom that God had conveniently placed in my way. But instead of being a clear, step-by-step equation for squeezing an answer from God, the process of discerning one’s relational vocation looks more like collecting the best ingredients for discernment, mixing them together, and then continuing to stir as you gain increasing confidence in God’s call. Here’s the five ingredients:
Develop your general spiritual muscles for discernment, as described in the previous chapter
Gain a healthy theology of marriage and celibacy, including removing any theological or emotional barriers to clearly hearing God’s call
Consider how your occupational vocation may be better complemented by marriage or celibacy
See if your past and present circumstances suggest God’s providence toward one vocation or another
Seek the wisdom of pastors, parents, mentors, and friends
 
A word of caution about these ingredients: no one ingredient is meant to reveals God’s preference to you. That goes both ways. Just because you want to get married and your Christian college roommate dreamed about being in your wedding doesn’t mean your discernment process is over. We each need to take the time to collect each of these ingredients and patiently seek mature confirmation of our intuition. But this also reassures the person who is collecting these ingredients and one question seems to point them toward the vocation they don’t want. Don’t fret or give up. Just keep discerning. Most who wisely discern will find a mix of signals among the fruit of seeking each of these elements of discernment, but the results will probably lean in one direction or the other. Then after patiently seeking confirmation from God for that leaning, God will provide the confidence we need—usually just short of the amount we desire, but just enough to take the next step. Let’s explore each of those ingredients. Thurian, 88






Study the Bible and Church teachings about theologies of vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Remove emotional barriers with a pastor or therapist
Awareness, not preference-lessness

2. Theology + Emotions

[Notes]
The second major ingredient in healthy discernment of one’s relational vocation is theological and emotional openness. We want to ensure that we have a healthy theology of marriage and celibacy, free of any theological or emotional hurdles to discernment. We need a good theological foundation.
 
A clear understanding of God’s design for the vocations of marriage and singleness will give you a better framework in which to digest the other ingredients for discernment. Many great resources about how the Church has historically understood God to have revealed his design for these vocations in Scripture have already been written, and more still may be needed.
 
If you could read only two books, I would suggestion you read Breaking the Marriage Idol by Kutter Calloway and Marriage and Celibacy by Max Thurian. Calloway’s Breaking the Marriage Idol is the best analysis of western cultural Christianity’s relationship with romance, and it includes some preliminary suggestions for how we can better teach about and support both marriage and vocational singleness. Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy is by far the best text on the theology of vocational singleness.
 
Other standouts for the Christian’s theology of marriage include Theology of the Body by Pope John Paul II, Mere Sexuality by Todd Wilson, and Divine Sex by Jonathan Grant. While I am not a Catholic, JPII’s Theology of the Body is a must-read for any Christian (or you can read Christopher West’s Theology of the Body for Beginners if you can’t make it through the original text). In short, Christian marriage (a marriage blessed and sustained by God) is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to enjoy intimacy with each other, raise children, and embody the gospel for each other and the world.
 
On the topic of vocational singleness, The Significance of Singleness by Christina Hitchcook and Singled Out by Christine Colon and Bonnie Field are both valuable explorations of the topic, but fall short of approaching the topic with the same theological depth as Max Thurian. Another helpful resources is Toward a Protestant Theology of Celibacy by Russell Hobbs—a great review of all of the Christian literature on the topic of celibacy.
 
Just as important as having the right theological foundation, we also need to remove some obstacles that might have accrued over time. We develop and continue to live in a broken world. Loneliness, divorce in your family, sexual sin, heartbreak, abandonment, rejection, and a host of other emotional wounds related to marriage, singleness, and family can bias our discernment. The Christian would benefit from processing those wounds with a parent, pastor, or counselor to remove any hurdles to clearly hearing God’s calling.
 
Poor theology and emotional wounds can be serious hurdles. A friend named Brett grew up in a church that rarely taught about God’s design for relationship, and his family was wrecked by divorce and a constant pursuit of the next right person. Unsurprisingly, Ben grew up to believe that friendship could never provide for him what he needed. He wasn’t interested in considering singleness for the Lord. He didn’t see any beauty in the possibility, and hoping romance would satisfy was all that was modeled growing up. Sadly, Ben has not been the first friend to share these sentiments, and he’s unlikely to be the last. Friends share honestly that they’ve never considered lifetime singleness, and then don’t intend to. They share with a proud defiance, not out of conceit, but because they don’t know any better. They don’t understand that God has actually commanded us to discern. They are ignorant because they were never taught. They sin in ignorance. But the damage on their lives, the people they marry despite God’s preference for singleness, and the damage on the Church remains the same.
 
With each of these ingredients for discerning marriage or vocational singleness, I want to emphasize signs a person might be called to vocational singleness. To be clear: I do not want anyone to mistakenly discern vocational singleness anymore than I want Christians to mistakenly discern marriage. But too few Christians have discerned a call to vocational singleness. While at least 90% of Christians will be called to marriage, it’s reasonable to assume that God wants to call at least 5% of Christians to vocational singleness. Yet less than 1% of Christians accept a call to vocational singleness in the modern era. As we explored in Chapter 2, considerable momentum pushes Christians toward romance and marriage. Combined with the poor teaching of and support for vocational singleness in the Church, Christians God wants to call to vocational singleness do not know how to listen for the call. The Church would benefit from particularly training each Christian to listen for the call to celibacy so that the 5-10% of Christians actually being called to vocational singleness accept the call.
 
To that end, as you’re studying theology of marriage and vocational singleness, if you find the theology of vocational singleness particularly beautiful, pay attention to that. That doesn’t necessarily mean you are called to vocational singleness. Those ultimately called to marriage will find theology of singleness appealing as well. But a deep appreciation for the theology of vocational singleness may be an early sign of a Christian’s calling.



Share



How different are the following definitions and diagram from the theological education you’ve been offered?
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children







How different are the following definitions and diagram from the theological education you’ve been offered?
Share






Perhaps if you’re called to be a pastor, teacher, helping professions, etc., vocational singleness is better suited?
Or perhaps you feel called to raise children as your primary kingdom work
Or neither…
3. Occupational Vocation

[Notes]
The third ingredient for discernment takes into account your day job. What kind of work has God called you to? Does that point you toward vocational singleness or marriage? Max Thurian puts it this way:
 
“It should be added that celibacy is only a circumstance, a state and a position demanded by a call of God which is greater and more complex—a special mission or a difficult ministry which would make family life impossible and which requires complete unattachedness; a life of contemplation or study which calls for entire freedom of spirit; life in a regular community for the sake of witness or of a freely available ministry in the Church. So celibacy cannot be considered a vocation for its own sake, but only in terms of a special service for God”.
 
Pastors, teachers, and other occupations in the helping professions that require numerous hours of work after 5 pm will be the first to tell you: it is difficult to be a good parent to both your church, classroom, etc. and to your family at home. While I don’t advocate for mandatory priestly celibacy, one of the primary reasons the Catholic Church asks its pastors to be celibate is so that they can fully commit themselves to their parish family. Inherent in the stories of pastors, teachers, and others seems to lie a recognition that raising children is a full-time job that might be incompatible with some occupational professions and with some kingdom work. Paul understood this in 1 Corinthians 7: 32-35 when he spoke about God’s design for vocational singleness. A key feature of Paul’s singleness was that he could fully commit himself to the kingdom work he had been called to because he didn’t have the do the important and costly work of raising a family.
 
Perhaps the kind of work you are called to is more compatible with either marriage or vocational singleness. For example, if you feel called to a special mission, a difficult ministry, or a life of contemplation or study, then a vocation of singleness might be the vocation best fitted to your work. Freedom from raising children will allow you to more fully commit yourself to the kingdom-building work God has called you to.
 
Toward the end of college, God made clear his call on my work: to teach the Church how to better love and serve gay people like me. Fast-forward to today, I run a ministry called EQUIP. Why do I mention all of this? Jesus invited the disciples to consider singleness for the sake of the kingdom. The singleness he commends in Matthew 19 and Paul urges in 1 Corinthians 7 is for a purpose. Those who find themselves called to kingdom work that might be better complemented singleness would benefit by pausing and asking: “Might God have planned for me to step into vocational singleness all along so that I could best carry out the kingdom work God has given me?” That’s the question I asked, and the obvious answer was, “Yes!” If my time and energy were divided between work and raising children, I doubt the mission would be accomplished. Even without children, the work God has given me to do seems impossible. How much less likely would I be to fulfill God’s intentions for me if I was a full-time minister and a full-time parent? God seemed to be calling me to kingdom work that would require a fuller commitment than parents could give, so singleness for the sake of the kingdom made sense for me.
 
On the other hand, you might feel particularly called to the work of raising children to become faithful and fruitful Christians. This is the case for my friend Chase. As I was discerning my call, he did the same. But as I became convinced that I was called to kingdom work that necessitated being singleness, he was increasingly convinced that the kingdom work he was called to was specifically to raise children. God grew in him a healthy desire to raise children—not to serve himself or fulfill dreams of being a parent—but because raising children for the kingdom was a difficult and important work that needed to be done well by those willing to live sacrificially. As I sought confirmation that God was calling me to vocational singleness, Chase hesitated to date too seriously until he received confirmation from God that marriage was His call.
 
Many of my friends see their work as a mother or father as their primary calling, and then their occupation—the work they get paid for—is merely a means to an ends. Certainly, they prefer work that pays well, matches their skills and interests, and is participating justly in the economy. But their first job is their family. People drawn to this vocation are likely called to marry and raise children.
 
Most people, however, don’t feel confidence in either of these directions. They don’t feel a clear calling to a work that would be better served by a vocation of singleness. But they also don’t feel a particular calling to raise a family as their primary work. Don’t get me wrong—many people want to make a different in the world and be a parent, but those leanings don’t tell us much about whether God is calling that person to marriage or a vocation of singleness. And that’s okay. For some this line of exploration will be fruitful, and for others it will not. But thankfully there are many ways a person might collect data to use in their discernment.
Thurian, 86
EQUIP. equipyourcommunity.org



Share



What difference would it make if most pastors, teachers, and people in the helping professions accepted a call to vocational singleness?






Has God left breadcrumbs to suggest my future path?
“…spiritual direction of these people should gradually lead them to consider that, if they ask for it, God will grant them the gifts necessary for accepting a way of life which they did not choose...”

4. Past + Present

[Notes]
The fourth ingredient for discernment searches for God’s providence in our past and present circumstances. Has God been trying to tell us something? Has He been gently nudging us toward one vocation or another? Perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to a vocation of celibacy?” I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to lifetime singleness. But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions.
 
Thurian says it this way: “...the circumstances of life can be signs of the vocation of God. The Lord, who directs all things by his providence, can show a man in his life history his intention of calling him to celibacy. St Paul recalls the meaning of a person’s past history when he writes to the Corinthians...(1 Cor 7:17-24). The apostle does not, of course, make past history into a determinism...But he sees in past life and in present circumstances, in the state or the condition assigned to each man, a result of the providence of God and a way of being led to hear the call of God and of serving him.”
 
So perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is because God intends for them to be single. Now this is a tricky subject, on which I think Thurian’s words would again be helpful: “We have not forgotten that there are people for whom unmarried life was not a free and voluntary choice but was rather an obligation imposed on them by the circumstances of their life. They were not able to marry, although they would have liked to do so. We should not speak of vocation or choice on the part of these men and women. However, this does not mean that the hard sacrifice which was imposed on them cannot take on a meaning in the plan of God. They can realize afterwards that this condition which was imposed on them has enabled them, in spite of great difficulties, to serve the Church more freely. The spiritual direction of these people should gradually lead them to consider that, if they ask for it, God will grant them the gifts necessary for accepting a way of life which they did not choose...”
Thurian, 86-87
Thurian, 93-94



Share



What would it take to move from involuntary singleness to chosen vocational singleness?






Involve parents, pastors, mentors, and friends
Seek out a spiritual director
5. Seek Others’ Wisdom

[Notes]
The fifth and perhaps most obvious ingredient for discerning between vocational singleness and marriage is getting the advice of others. Our parents, pastors, mentors, and friends have unique perspective on our lives. They might come alongside you in your study of theology of marriage and celibacy. Maybe they’ve grown up with you and know what emotional barriers you might be experiencing to open-handedly offering this question to God. Perhaps they can help you process emotional wounds standing in the way of receiving from God. The connect between your work and your relational vocation might be more apparent to your friends. Or maybe they see God’s providence in your life in ways you can’t.
 
Thurian urges Christian not to be alone in their discernment, but instead include their church, in the following ways: “Finally, the Christian is not alone in his decision; he is attended by the Church, by a community, by spiritual direction which can help him to discern his vocation. In this way he can avoid the subjectivity of a too personal choice. The counsel of his fellow Christians will give his resolution the objective character that will reassure him in moments of doubt.”
 
Moreover, inviting others to help us in this process means more voices lifting up your discernment to God and more hearts listening for God’s guidance. As I shared previously, bringing this question to my small group at church provided some of the last confidence I needed to step into vocational singleness. They prayed for me and for my discernment. They offered me advice from their own observations of my work and relationships. But most importantly, they each shared about a peace and confidence from the Holy Spirit that I had been discerning wisely.
Thurian, 87



Share



What other community resources might you seek out?






“A man will never have complete certainty concerning his vocation and the rightness of his choice. He must, to a certain extent, make a leap in the dark. Sometimes it is not until after decision and self-commitment that a vocation becomes clearer and more certain…”
On Confidence

[Notes]
Once you’ve gathered all of the evidence you can, leaned into the discernment process, arrived at a plausible conclusion, and tested this conclusion, there’s only one thing left to do: take a leap. Often, we will find ourselves wishing for more confidence before taking another step, but Thurian offers this encouragement:
 
“A man will never have complete certainty concerning his vocation and the rightness of his choice. He must, to a certain extent, make a leap in the dark. Sometimes it is not until after decision and self-commitment that a vocation becomes clearer and more certain. God wills the just to live by faith, in other words, often by decisions that are more or less blind, and not by sight, by logical reasoning, by objective criteria or by miraculous visions. If God grants these things, we must bless Him for them, but they are not necessary for the response to a vocation. This act of faith and this decision, which sometimes have to be made without evidence or insight, are not, however, unmotivated acts or a sort of wager. The act of faith, the response to a vocation, the decision for a way of life or the choice of a ministry are founded on the Word of God, read and meditated upon in a spirit of prayer. Thus the assurance given by Christ in the Gospel that celibates for the kingdom of heaven’s sake are following his example and are in communion with his manhood, and the assertions of St Paul concerning the value of celibacy for the ministry, will be supports on which faith and decision can be solidly based.”
 
Before making public commitments to lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom, did I still have doubt? Absolutely! I wished my time of discernment had been marked by an even deeper sense of closeness to God so that I could be even more confident that I was hearing clearly. I wondered whether my sexuality or the ways the unhealthy practice of marriage in cultural Christianity have wounded me clouded by judgement. Perhaps I could faithfully do the kingdom work God has called me to while raising children with a wife. Admittedly, I had dated women and knew that would be good. God even seemed to bless marriage for me. Most of my friends and family were confident in my call to celibacy, but there were still some who hoped I would get married instead—maybe God was trying to speak through them in some way? There were plenty of reasons to doubt. But as Thurian predicted, my vocation became clearer and more certain after my decision and self-commitment. My appreciation for the vocation of marriage and the beauty of raising children has grown, just as my appreciation for my own vocation has grown. I’m increasingly confident that even if I weren’t gay, God would have called me to vocational singleness. With each passing year, it becomes more difficult to imagine dividing my energies between raising children and the ministry work I’ve been called to without one or both suffering. When I share with new friends about my story, my discernment, and my calling, they continue to affirm my calling. In the words of Thurian, my decision may have been to some extent blind, wanting for more logical reasoning, lacking in miraculous visions, but that act of faith has led to an inner peace demonstrated by less fear, less anger, less sadness, and increasing joy.
 
Thurian, 87






Public commitments help family/friends take our commitments more seriously, leading to better support

Plus, public commitments strengthen the confidence and joy of the discerner
Public Commitments

[Notes]
When the Nashville Family of Brothers was first developing, my pastor encouraged us to make our first commitment publicly.

Why? Because he knew that our families and friends needed to see us making this commitment so that they would take our vocations more seriously. He knew that they would realize the weight of our commitments and our need for support from them in the coming months and years. And he knew that we needed a public celebration for the joy and weight of the commitments to settle in for us. Man was he correct.

In front of friends and family, held up by four community pastors, I began my formal discernment process with the Nashville Family of Brothers, and I couldn’t get through the first sentence of my promises without falling apart in tears. I cried because, in that moment, I was showing the people in that sanctuary the deepest desires of my heart; I was letting my heart publicly begin to hope for family, and the tender part of my heart found that beautiful and terrifying. I couldn’t get through the first sentence: “I hope that God has called me to family with the men discerning the Nashville Family of Brothers.” Part of my tears was fear of letting my heart grow to expect God will grant me this family. I’m terrified to hope only to be let down again. But that fear was overwhelmed by joy and hope seen in my tears. After all of the work over the past decade battling to find answers, enduring spiritual abuse and abandonment, and seeing myself injured and others wiped out by spiritual warfare, I finally made it. As I saw my future brothers in the audience, heard another brother make the same promises, and multiple pastors laid their hands on me to pray for this endeavor, the boy inside of me finally felt like it was safe to step out of the armor and hope.

If you’re like me, you need family, but you’re afraid to expect to find it. It seems safer to learn to be satisfied with your current loneliness. I’m still scared. There’s no guarantee that this is God’s will or that the wills of men will cooperate. But I have to believe that the desire for family—a desire that God put into me—is good. I have to believe that I will do so much more for God’s kingdom if I find family. I have to believe that God didn’t just make me to fight, and that it will soon be safe to love.






Can gay people genuinely discern if they feel like they only have one option?

Are their negative effects of defaulting to celibacy (perpetual temporary singleness)?
LGBT+ Discernment

[Notes]
Is a life of singleness a response to unwanted SSA or a call separate from that?
Do gay people really need to discern? What are the consequences of Side B gay people defaulting to celibacy?
What about the other two categories of eunuchs?
Is one of the reasons you run this class to normalize discernment between Singleness & marriage and thereby help sexual minorities?

If we’re going to ask straight people to discern, gay people have got to discern
At least theologically open to it, recognize emotional barriers, ask for God to provide indifference, and seek God’s wisdom

If we don’t, we don’t own our decision
Aren’t all-in
Don’t take responsibility for thriving
And bail when it gets to hard because it wasn’t our choice anyway

Challenges of never-ending temporary singleness same for gay people as they are for straight people: shallowly rooted in spiritual family and kingdom work, DON’T HAVE THE GIFT

Thurian says it this way: “...the circumstances of life can be signs of the vocation of God. The Lord, who directs all things by his providence, can show a man in his life history his intention of calling him to celibacy. St Paul recalls the meaning of a person’s past history when he writes to the Corinthians...(1 Cor 7:17-24). The apostle does not, of course, make past history into a determinism...But he sees in past life and in present circumstances, in the state or the condition assigned to each man, a result of the providence of God and a way of being led to hear the call of God and of serving him.”







Cautionary Tale?

[Notes]
Cautionary Tale
 
1 Timothy 5 describes a house of widows and the commitments to celibacy women have made. Remember that in Acts chapter 6, one of the first actions the newly formed Church took was to provide for the many single women who had become widows when their former husbands became Christians and divorced all of their wives but one. The Church saw it as their responsibility to provide housing, physical protection, sustenance, and opportunities to participate in the work of the Church. In 1 Corinthians 7:40 we hear Paul’s encouragement for these single women: “Yet in my judgment she is happier if she remains as she is.” Namely, to remain single and commit to vocational singleness. In 1 Timothy 5, then, we hear Paul’s judgment of widows who hastily discerned their call to vocational singleness, made a commitment to this house of widows, and then sought to be freed from their commitment. In verses 5 through 10 Paul describes model conduct for widows, including trusting God, faithfulness to her former husband, a track record of carrying for children, hospitality, etc. Then Paul suggests some new conditions for entrance into this community, most notably, that women be over 60 years old. Why? Because as Paul describes in verses 11-15, younger widows have been known to practice poor discernment of their calling, pledge celibacy without fully committing themselves to the vocation, allowing their sexual desires to overwhelm them, gossiping among the widows, breaking their pledge, and—in some cases—leaving the faith entirely. In light of these pattern among younger widows, he provides a practical suggestion for this specific community to refuse younger widows, and he gives the younger widows an allowance to break their first commitments to vocational singleness and marry.
 
A cursory reading of 1 Timothy 5 might suggest that only older Christians should commit to vocational singleness once they have no other options and that those committed to vocational singleness can break their commitment at any time without consequence. Quite the contrary. Paul encouragement for all Christians to consider vocational singleness has been made clear already. Nor does he give this allowance to break their first commitments lightly. This story is primarily a caution against poor discernment. Paul offers these two practical suggestions reluctantly because young widows have poorly discerned their vocation, failed to keep their vow, and committed serious sin by breaking their vow. It would have better for them to have first discerned marriage or kept their vow to a vocation of celibacy. 
 
Paul is commending that God’s best for those who have made a vow to marriage or celibacy is for them to keep their vow. Not doing so is a serious sin. Even if you married the wrong person, weren’t called to marriage at all, or weren’t called to celibacy. It is still serious sin. Will some of you remedy that by breaking your vow and sinning? Yes. I wish you wouldn’t, but I know some of you have been so reckless and careless in making your vows that there might be less sin by breaking your vows and living how God actually called you rather than honoring your vows. But, God would rather you honor your vows and fully commit yourself to walking them out faithfully.
 
St. Augustine confirms this understanding of 1 Timothy 5 when he says the following: “Once these and other vows have been pronounced, when they are made in the regular forms, they may on no condition be broken, because the resolution was made unconditionally. This is a commandment of the Lord; these words enable us to understand it: ‘Make your vows to the Lord your God, and perform them’ (Ps. 76:11). The apostle derives from this his judgement on some women who, having previously made a vow of continence, afterwards wish to marry, although they were perfectly free to marry before their vow; ‘They incur condemnation for having violated their first pledge’ (1 Tim 5:12).” Augustine makes clear that commitments to vocational singleness are meant to be kept, and breaking those commitments are a sin. Yet he recognizes that before their commitment, they were free to marry. What could have prevented these circumstances? Better discernment.
 
Why is it so important that we avoid poor discernment? Because the results can be painful. One of my closest friends married a man who failed to share his half-hearted commitment to marriage. Once the standard hardships of marriage and raising children set in, he started searching for a way out. He convinced himself that he married my friend under false pretenses, so it was okay in the eyes of God to get divorced. My friend resisted the request for divorce for years, but eventually she was compelled to comply. Today, her ex-husband is no longer a Christian, and she raises their two children alone. She loves her children, but she speaks honestly about her wish that she had discerned more carefully and never married her husband. She admits that she wanted to be married, and she married the first man who would say yes. By no means does she think her current hardship is some punishment for her poor discernment. But she will urge anyone considering marriage or committing to vocational singleness to discern carefully. If you don’t, the painful consequences can last a lifetime.
70 St. Augustine, De conjugiis adulterinis, Book 1, ch. XXIV, Migne, P.L. 40, 468.
