


CARING FOR

GAY CHRISTIANS

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you




Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
My name is Pieter Valk
I studied at Vanderbilt University, Lipscomb University, and Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary. One day a week I’m a licensed professional counselor who meets with gay people trying to make sense of their faith and sexuality. The rest of the week, I lead an organization called EQUIP. We’re a team of missionary consultants that help churches become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic. 
There’s a reason why both of my jobs focus on the intersection of faith and sexuality: I am a Christian. I am gay. And I believe that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.

Also, I want to make 2 quick notes about terminology. First, what do I mean when I say “gay” and “gay Christian?” I’m going to be using the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex, whether they be gay, lesbian, or bisexual. I don’t mean to communicate anything about their theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out by using that word. It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”. And I’ll use the phrase “gay Christian” to refer to people who are Christians and experience same-sex attraction. I use that phrase to describe myself because that’s the term that I’m most comfortable with. But not everyone uses that phrase, and Christians I respect prefer to use different language. There is healthy discussion Christians can have about that disagreement. For now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.

Second, how would I suggest you navigate identity language conversation with students? Term-mirroring. Arguments about what words Christians should use to describe themselves can be an early barrier to the important conversations: do you know Jesus, is He your Lord and Savior, and would you consider following God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship? So instead of getting stuck in identity language conversations, practice term mirroring. Ask students what words they use to describe themselves and what those words mean to them. Then choose to use their words with there definitions as an act of hospitality. This doesn’t mean you are agreeing with their definitions or identifications. It just means you’re not letting identity language conversations be a barrier.



Caring For
Gay Christians



How can we share God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people winsomely?
How can we invite gay Christians who are unsure about sexual ethics to follow God’s teachings?
How can we respond to the 8 biggest questions in pastoral ministry?

[Notes]
I want to do three things today

First, explore how can we share God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people winsomely?

Second, discuss how can we invite gay Christians who are unsure about sexual ethics to follow God’s teachings?

And third, address the 8 biggest questions in pastoral ministry with gay students



God’s Wisdom for All



God created us for intimacy in the context of family
God knows what’s best for us and He has revealed that through the Bible + Church
God says there are two best paths: singleness for the Lord or Christian marriage

[Notes]
God created us for intimacy in the context of family
God enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He has made us in his image for those same things
Because He made us, God knows what’s best for us and He has revealed that to us through the Bible and the Church
God says there are two best paths for enjoying intimacy in the context of family: Singleness for the Lord or Christian Marriage
And He’s pretty specific about the best ways to do these




God’s Wisdom for All



Singleness for the Lord = giving up romance, marriage, sex, children to do kingdom work
Christian marriage = lifelong union between Christian man + woman to raise children
Both are calls to enjoy family in the body of Christ
Both are about embodying the gospel, but in different ways

[Notes]
Singleness for the Lord is a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children to use the time and energy you would have used raising children to heal our communities
Christian marriage is a lifelong union between a Christian man and women to raise Christian children
Both are calls to enjoy family in the body of Christ
Both are about embodying the gospel, but in different ways




God’s Wisdom for All



God wants us to offer both possibilities to Him and seek His preference
Why? I don’t know. But if God exists, He knows best, and He’s revealed that to us through the Bible and the Church…
Following His wisdom will lead to the truest intimacy, the deepest meaning, the most life-giving family, and the most satisfying purpose

[Notes]
Better yet, while singleness for the Lord and Christian marriage are equally good and beautiful, God knows which would will be best for each of us
He wants us to seek His preference, to open-handedly offer both of these possibilities to Him and then seek the path He wants to give
Why is this the way God put the world together? I don’t know
But if I believe this God exists, He knows best, and He’s revealed that to us through the Bible and the Church
Then these two paths will lead to the truest intimacy, the deepest meaning, the most life-giving family, and 
the most satisfying purpose
If we want the best, the most the world has to offer, and we trust God, we should made decisions about our sexual stewardship based on God’s wisdom

what do you notice?
i didnt say a thing about gay people
about gay sex
about gay marriage
but i told everyone everything they need to know



Inviting Gay Christians



Admit: Christians have talked about this poorly and acted even worse
Admit: gay Christians can’t thrive under God’s wisdom in most churches
Admit: this isn’t fair





[Notes]
How can we invite gay Christians who are unsure about sexual ethics to follow God’s teachings?

first, recognize the challenge
Christians have done a crappy job talking about this
and an even worse job making good on our promises

lots of people grew up hearing that gay people were bad, dirty, and disgusting
they heard that gay people go to hell, merely because of who they are attracted to
they heard gay sex compared to beastiality or pedophilia
gay people are kicked out of their homes, beaten, and murdered
as a result, gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide

on top of that,
our churches held gay people to high standards of sexual stewardship in the Bible, but they looked the other way when straight people needed to bend or break the rules
most of our churches never talk about sexuality, leaving straight people to talk about gay people in problematic ways and leaving gay people wondering whether they churches are safe
our churches dont teach parents how to talk to their kids about sexuality, so gay teens wait 5 years on average to share with a parent or a pastor—5 year of makings sense of this without your parents or pastors
when you met with a pastor for help, they pointed you to a therapist who thought they could make you straight
and none of our churches are places where gay people could actually thrive—with reasonable effort—in singleness for the Lord or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex

to put it frankly, none of our churches are places where gay people could actually thrive according to God’s teachings

at first glance, it makes total sense to me why you’d reject a traditional sexual ethic
it doesnt seem fair
it doesnt have great results




Inviting Gay Christians



But there’s also bad results of rejecting God’s teachings
God’s wisdom is still best, even if Christians have embodied it poorly
Churches must do better






[Notes]
but there’s also bad results of rejecting God’s teachings
most notably, the gay Christians I know that adopted a progressive sexual ethic usually lost their faith within a couple of years
I don’t wish this on them
I wish every gay person had a life-giving union with Christ, regardless of their beliefs and actions
but I’ve consistently seen that adopting a progressive sexual ethic often led to losing their faith
not because God was punishing them in some way
but because you have to twist the Bible or throw it out altogether to believe in a progressive sexual ethic
and once we believe that the Bible and the Church can’t tell us who God is
what’s the likelihood that the God we want God to exist is even real?

and even if Christians have done a crappy job of loving gay people, that doesn’t make God’s wisdom about our sexualities any less true
if a God exists, if that God reveals Himself to us through the Bible and the Church, and if that God knows what is best for us, then a traditional sexual ethic is true
yet, if something is true, it should be good and beautiful
and its not right now
why?
its not because gay Christians arent trying hard enough
they are some of the most faithful people i know

no, its because the Church is doing a crappy job
churches have got to do what it takes to be places where gay people could actually thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
to be honest, until then, until a traditional sexual ethic isn’t just true but it is good and beautiful in experience, it will probably take a miraculous work of the Holy Spirit or some rock-bottom, painful experience in your life to convince to follow a traditional sexual ethic




Inviting Gay Christians



For now, can we focus on Jesus?
In the meantime, would you consider following God’s wisdom?
Can I encourage you to seek out intimate friendship?






[Notes]
so for now, can we focus on Jesus?
because God understands you pain, the hypocrisy of the Church, much better than I do
ultimately Jesus suffered more pain than any other human, and His suffering—at the hands of religious elites—was more unfair than anything anyone else has experienced
Jesus gets it
And my hunch is He doesn’t want to lead you with fear
He wants to lead you with love
tough love sometimes, but love
Because Jesus gets it, He is patient
I’ll be patient too
No matter what you believe or what kind of relationships you’re in, I will continue to meet with you if you want to, prayer with and for you, ask you questions, share with you what I understand about Jesus, remind you that God loves you and wants you to have the fullest life

In the meantime, I’d encourage you to steward your sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic, even if you aren’t convinced of it, because while it will be a difficult path, I’m convinced the other paths will be even more painful and unsatisfying
But I completely understand if you choose something different

And regardless, can I encourage you to lean into intimate friendship with other people in our community
Even if you’re dating, can I encourage you to let those friendships provide some of the companionship you need
Can I challenge you to take risks by asking for what you need?
And when those friendships provide what you need, could I invite you to see that as God providing the companionship you need through the body of Christ?




THE BIG

QUESTIONS




[Notes]
We’re going to tackle 8 questions that gay people often ask pastors as they are making sense of their faith and sexuality
I want to be clear: I’m not offering responses to these questions so you can go find the gay people in your community and tell them the answers
But I’m pretty confident that none of yall would do that
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when gay people raise them
Or, you might even have a gay person in your community asking you to lead them in making sense of their faith and sexuality
In that case, you can create space for these questions, listen well, and help the gay people in your community think well about them



The Big Questions



Will you treat me differently now that you know?
Honesty
Honor courage in sharing

[Notes]
Terrifying when I first shared my story






Do you think I chose to be gay?
None of us are how God made us to be
Neither born gay nor chose to be gay
The Big Questions

[Notes]
For many, this gets down to the classic question: “are people born gay or do they choose to be gay”
Well I want to make clear right from the start, I never chose to be gay, and you never chose to be straight
Now to the second question: are people born gay
Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important. Commonly, many argue that if we knew that people were born gay, then we should assume that God intended people to be gay. Then, if God intended people to be gay, He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the same sex. So, are people born gay?
Twins and hormone studies inconclusive, suggestion predisposition
The consensus of scientists…
Not genetically determined
But even if it was, that doesn’t tell us anything about God’s intentions, whether it is good
That’s a theological question, not a scientific question
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God made us to be
corrupted at genetic level and raised in broken world
So my answer: neither born gay nor choose to be gay







Do you think I chose to be gay?
Understanding developmental factors may help an individual gain acceptance but should not be addressed with the goal of “fixing” the individual
The Big Questions

[Notes]
For me this was helpful because it wasn’t a mystery anymore.
My experience also breaks the duality—it doesn’t fit in the culture war

My experience in counseling is that addressing emotional wounds doesn’t make people straight
It makes the a more well-adjusted gay person







Did God make me gay?
Does God make people gay?
Give people over to “a depraved mind”?
Allow people to develop same-sex attraction?
Play no part?
The Big Questions






Did God make me gay?
Did not intend for anyone to be gay or make anyone gay (James 1:13, Romans 1:26-27) 
We are all corrupted at a genetic level and grow up in a broken world (Psalm 51:5) 
God allowed it to happen (Romans 5:12)
The Big Questions






Did God make me gay?
If God protected us from the consequences of our actions and the actions of others, would we really have choice?
God seeks to redeem all brokenness for our good and His glory (Romans 8:28) 
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Question of Evil
No good answer







Will you try to make me straight?
No proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change
Praying for change with any level of expectation is dangerous and unnecessary
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Scripture does not promise permanent relief from any temptation in this lifetime

Limited high-quality research demonstrates that only 3-4% of people who participated in sexual orientation change efforts experienced any change in their same-sex attractions, and even these results were from self-reports that cannot be verified.

No proven combination of spiritual disciplines or counseling to bring about change

Do miracles happen? Yes.

But praying for change with any level of expectation is dangerous.
The likelihood of your attractions changing even a little are the same as you getting into Harvard, becoming a millionaire, or playing high school baseball and eventually going pro. Would it be wise to pray for those things expectantly?
What happens when your faith in God, your belief that God is good, or your belief that God loves you hinges on whether you get into Harvard, become a millionaire, or your same-sex attractions change?
There is insufficient research about the effectiveness and harmfulness of sexual orientation change efforts in churches and counseling centers.
From my estimation of limited research and consistent anecdotal information, the frequent harm of ex-gay programs outweighs the benefits few experience.

Moreover, the search for change is unnecessarily risky: LGBT+ Christians don’t need to change their attractions to belong and thrive in our churches according to a traditional sexual ethic. Based on this, I would caution an individual from seeking to change their attractions. 

It’s a brokenness, but we don’t choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing it
Better to ask God how he wants to redeem for my good and His glory






Where is God in all of this?
Reassure that God is not surprised or waiting for orientation change
Be honest with God—He can take it
Reject shame as a barrier to intimacy
Carefully invite God back into the conversation
The Big Questions

[Notes]
For many gay people, we felt shame before God about our sexuality at an early age
Then we tried to hide our sexuality from God so that we felt less shame
Then the Bible and prayer were used as weapons by Christians trying to make us straight
And then when we realized that we did nothing to bring our sexual orientation about, we couldn’t do anything to change it, and God didn’t respond to our pleas for Him to change it, we were angry at God for allowing us to be gay and not relieving us of this burden
All of this combines to leave gay people feeling like God is far away
They desperately want to feel close to God, but they don’t know how anymore

First, we can reassure them that God is not surprised, and He sees you as valuable (Psalm 139)
Reassure that you don’t have to become straight for God to love you
We are all broken and accepted before a gracious and merciful God who will never abandon us

Second, be honest with yourself and God—God can take it
I was really angry with God but suppressed that anger for a decade
Finally, I had a mentor who encouraged me to be honest
Jacob wrestling God—it is intimate
I had to express that anger before I could believe that God loves me—and honestly, I am still working through that

Third, help them clear out the shame that has become a barrier to connecting with God
Shame is often Satan’s primary weapon with sexual temptation
Our response: Identify, Reject, & Replace + Share
When we tell people to hide their attractions
Not to talk about them
Not to find community with people like them who understand their story
We heap on the shame

Fourth, invite God back into the conversation carefully
It is of upmost importance to strike the right balance between encouraging a personal relationship with Jesus, encouraging Bible reading and prayer, and not doing further damage or causing more shame.
For some LGBT people, this might mean patiently waiting for the Holy Spirit to heal old wounds caused by others who wielded Scripture and prayer as weapons.  For others, it may mean finding non-threatening ways to include Bible reading and prayer in their lives.

-This could mean using corporate prayers that are read aloud together during community group.  An LGBT person may feel disconnected from private prayer, perhaps having been assured countless times that God would heal them through prayer.  When He didn’t, prayer became a reminder of their failure to pray hard enough or God’s failure to act.  Corporate prayer may be a way for LGBT+ people to engage in prayer safely.
-This could mean avoiding “God is my friend”-type worship music.  For someone who has been convinced that God is disappointed or disgusted with them because of something they can’t control (their sexual attraction), God isn’t a friend.  He’s more like an angry giant.  Instead, churches can choose music that leans on theology or corporate lament or praise  instead of emotion-driven appeals.
-This may mean that God doesn’t “speak to” everyone when they read Scripture and that not everyone will benefit from a “personal devotion” or “quiet time.”  And being ok with Scripture used as learning about God’s character and the way He wants us to live.  Not everyone will find a personal meaning in Scripture that fits their exact circumstance and walk away from Bible study feeling that they were “fed” or “filled.”  Offer these Christians other ways to engage in Scripture and deepen their understanding of the character of God that isn’t dependent on emotions.
 
Of course, we hope that Bible-reading and prayer eventually lose their shame-producing capabilities.  We want gay people to think of God as a loving brother and hear His voice.  But for many LGBT people, that’s not the reality right now.  And it may never be.  So we can get creative with our discipling efforts.






Can I call myself gay?
Practice term-mirroring as hospitality
Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior
Create space for Christians to use the work gay
The Big Questions

[Notes]
Practice term mirroring as hospitality
Particularly if non-Christian

Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior to lower the stakes

Create space for Christians to use the word gay
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage
There is no perfect term for ministry to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay teens in your church, and straight culture warriors in your church
I choose to use the word most effective with gay teens and then make clear what I mean
Why?

gay teens are 5 times more likely than their peers to attempt suicide
LGBT+ youth who are religious are 38% more likely to attempt suicide than their non-religious LGBT+ peers
Gay teens from highly rejecting families are 8.4 times more likely to attempt suicide than their LGBT+ peers
And, 54% of gay people who grew up in the church have left

Using words like “gay” and “LGBT” are most effective with gay teens
Regardless of how hard you try to shelter your children, these are the words they will hear their friends use and media use to describe people who experience same-sex attraction
So if you tried to communicate with teens about this subject using “same-sex attraction", you are likely to be confusing or irrelevant, at best, or hateful, at worst.
If you set up a false dichotomy that they can either identify as gay or be a Christian, you are adding to the Gospel, and Paul has strong words for “Christians” who add to the Gospel.
If you force them to use terms that no one in their generation uses, instead of using language that is definitionally neutral, you are much less likely to be effective.
If a teen who will one day realize they experience same-sex attraction grows up hearing most of the world name their experience as being “gay” but you only use that word in a derogatory way that is mutually exclusive to God’s love, you have set that student up to adopt a progressive sexual ethic, reject God all together, and/or contemplate suicide.

I think it’s also important to distinguish between using the word ”gay” phenomenologically vs. ontologically
I am using the word phenomenologically, not ontologically. When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based on one’s experience or what it appears to be. In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design. When I use the word gay, I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay. I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay. I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same-sex and using (in my opinion) the best word to describe that experience.

Ultimately, its an opportunity to share the gospel
"I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
I am a child of God, first and foremost
Jesus and Jesus alone sits on the throne of my life
And I experience same-sex attraction
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences
I feel connected with people in the past who have had similar experiences
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences
I use the word gay to identify with people, not to identify with sin






 What do I do with my loneliness?
Ask, “What do you really need?”
Normalize intimacy needs
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Recognize meeting intimacy needs in healthy ways as an important spiritual discipline
The Big Questions

[Notes]
First ask what do you really need?
Do you really need something sexual or romantic?
Or do you need someone to talk, someone you know will be home when you get home, someone to celebrate with, someone to hold you when you cry
Often when we describe what we really need, its rarely something exclusively romantic or sexual

Next, normalize having intimacy needs, needing other people
If Jesus, the author and perfector of our faith needed the angels to attend to him in the wilderness and begged his disciples to stay up with him and pray with him before he was taken away—if our savior was a human with intimacy needs, its okay for us to have needs, its normal

Then recognize that if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, our broken flesh will reach out for unsatisfying and destructive alternatives
Therefore, proactively meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways is an important part of taking care of our temple
As Christians who reject spirit-body dualism, we need to embrace that taking care of our body is just as important as taking care of our soul
So our intimacy needs aren’t something to be ignored, they are something to be fulfilled






 What do I do with my loneliness?
Same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
Seek healthy relationships with safe friends

The Big Questions

[Notes]
Next, we can point out that same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
This doesn’t mean that if I meet all of my intimacy needs today, I won’t be gay tomorrow
But I have seen that when I’m getting what I really need—healthy friendship with other men—my desires for something romantic or sexual are easier to dismiss

So encourage those you disciple to seek out healthy relationships with safe friends
My life got better when I stopped ignoring my loneliness and started meeting my needs in healthy ways with deep friendship
And to this day, if I am struggling with lust, instead of shaming myself, I want my first response to be asking myself whether I have been meeting my intimacy needs in healthy ways (which I haven’t)

I think some of this question isn’t just “what can I do with my loneliness today?”
But also, “how do I keep from being lonely in my 40s, 50s, and so on?”
To answer that, lets move to the last big question






 What future can I hope for?
A lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship
Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world
Obedience to God’s teachings and surrendering our brokenness to God will bring goodness (Jeremiah 7:23)
The Big Questions

[Notes]
For gay people like me who have been stewarding our sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic for awhile, particularly in celibacy, this is our biggest question
We can white-knuckle our way through celibacy for a couple of years
But after awhile its exhausting to walk out a vocation with often little support from our church, family, or friends
Plus as we age, our friends get married, have kids, and don’t have time or space for us in their lives
We’re tired of hearing pastors tell us, “Jesus can be everything you need,” when those pastors don’t live that life
Those pastors have a spouse and kids to go home to every night

So, what future can gay Christian hope for?

[discuss the points]










 What future can I hope for?
God invites everyone to vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
At churches that have become places where gay people can thrive according to God’s wisdom, both are equally good and available to gay people
The Big Questions

[Notes]
But there in lies the problem
I’ve never met a church that is a place where gay people can thrive—with reasonable effort—according to a traditional sexual ethic
If we’re being honest, most of your churches aren’t places that can offer gay people much hope right now
The best way you can answer this question is by being honest
For most of you, an honest answer is, “I wish this weren’t the case, but our church has been doing a poor job of supporting single and gay people for decades. I wish I could promise you that that will get better soon, but I can’t. The cross you’ll bear will probably be more painful than many of your peers. I am sorry. The world is not supposed to be this way. Our church is not supposed to be this way. So I personally give you permission to hold my feet to the fire on this. Don’t stop reminding me that things must be different, and quickly.”

Don’t be afraid to apologize for the sins of the Church, confess on behalf of the church
You don’t need to apologize for your beliefs, but you can apologize that the Church hasn’t done enough to be a place where gay people could thrive with reasonable effort according to a traditional sexual ethic

And finally after you apologize, affirm their need for committed, intimate family
Ultimately, they want hope that they will find family
God has created each of us for family
Yet most gay people have had a hard time finding it
So help them find that




QUESTIONS?





[Notes]
So there’s your answers to some of the big questions
