Navigating Gender Incongruence &Caring for Trans* People
SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories & Terminology
2. Theology
3. Culture & Pastoral Care
4. Kids & Case Studies


[Notes]
Stories & Terminology Become more familiar with the stories of Christians navigating gender incongruence + Understand common terminology

Theology | Explore theology of sexedness and gender

Explore progressive worldviews about gender

Learn | Learn how to walk alongside those who experience gender incongruence

SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories | Become more familiar with the stories of Christians navigating gender incongruence
2. Understand | Understand common terminology
3. Theology | Explore theology of sexedness and gender
4. Explore | Explore progressive worldviews about gender
5. Learn | Learn how to walk alongside those who experience gender incongruence
We want to be careful

[Notes]
We want to be carefulover the past 10 years, a consensus of compassionate orthodoxy on same-sex attractions has coalescedwe at Equip are 95% confident in our theological convictions when it comes to sexual minoritiesbut a consensus on compassionate orthodoxy on gender incongruence has not yet crystallizedthat's part of what Equip is doing by developing this resourceand giving specific answers to questionseven if we aren't 100% sure those answers are rightwe are attempting to contribute to building a consensusbut with that, we hold these conclusions less tightlywe are not certain that we've gotten this rightwe're certain we've gotten at least a couple of things wrongbut that is how the Church arrives at better answersby tryingand then workshopping those answersand then trying againfor the sake of trans people, we have got to find better answersbecause a lack of answers has kept our churches from ministering to trans people in any meaningful wayout of fear, the Church been silentand in the process, trans people have suffered alonewe have to do betterand that starts with trying to find better answers, knowing the process will be messywhat does that mean?we're open to correctionand you don't have to align with us 100% to work with us

For those of you who agree with these convictions

[Notes]
For those of you who agree with these convictionsor believe that God is calling Christians to even more conservative convictionscan I point out somethingif those convictions are based on the assertion that our biological sex and reproductive capacities are a gift from Godand when those are functioning properly, it is a rejection of God's gift and therefore a sin to alter themthat when our biological sex and reproductive capacities are, for the most part, as God intendedyet we respond by saying, "Hey God, I actually know better how my body should be. I am going to use the tools available to me to make my body the way I think it should be"then what's the difference between cross-gender hormones and sex-reassignment surgeryversus a vasectomy or contraception or cosmetic surgery?can we really be against the first set of those but not the second?to be clear, I'm not saying that we know with certainty that both are wrongbut we do know with certainty that our wisdom on each should be consistent


Sex—Being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—Psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity 

Gender Dysphoria – A medical term for a clinically impairing experience of distress associated with the incongruence wherein one’s psychological and emotional gender identity does not match one’s biological sex. 

Gender Incongruence – An acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex
PERSONALSTORIES

[Notes]
My story of gender dysphoria begins at age eight. I remember playing with my sister and wanting to dress up as a princess with her. I put on one of her princess dresses, the “heels” that came with it, and started strutting around the house with her. My dad later had a conversation with me that said something to the effect that it was not ok for me to do that. He did not shame me or scold me, but explained why he believed men and boys should not dress in womens clothing. The only problem was I didn’t feel like a boy, but I believed in the bible and trusted my dad (as well as being a strict rule follower) so that was the end of it. 
Fast forward four years and I begin going through puberty. No one likes going through it, it’s hard and awkward and uncomfortable but for me, I despised it. I hated everything about my body. I hated the genetalia I had, hated the feelings I had for men, and wanted more than anything to be rid of my body hair and penis. This was complicated more by the fact that I was experiencing what I now know is a fairly common condition called galactorrhea which is when the body produces milk unrelated to childbirth. I was embarrassed, ashamed of my body, and wondering if God had made a mistake and I was actually supposed to be a girl. I had nowhere to take these thoughts and feelings, so I hid them away and ignored them. Stories of people like me are being heard more and more today. Yet the backlash that we experience is more than that of any other type of queer person. Trans* individuals have become the focus of a ton of legislature, political debates, business conversations, church sermons, and more, typically focusing on the negative implications of allowing surgeries, shared bathrooms in schools, allowing trans participants in women’s sports, the effect on feminism, the list goes on and on. What is not talked about issues that actually affect trans* people on a daily basis:  



8
PERSONAL STORIES
41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population

Trans suicide rates rose even higher for those who lost a job due to:
bias (55%) 
were harassed/bullied in school (51%)
had low household income (61%) 
were the victim of physical assault (61%) 
or were the victim of sexual assault (65%)

[Notes]
Distubingly, 41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population. Trans suicide rates rose even higher for those who lost a job due to bias (55%), were harassed/bullied in school (51%), had low household income (61%), were the victim of physical assault (61%), or were the victim of sexual assault (65%). 



9
PERSONAL STORIES
Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of (compared to the general population): 
borderline personality disorder
schizophrenia 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
autism spectrum disorder

[Notes]
Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of borderline personality disorder, schizophrenia, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder compared to the general population. 


10
PERSONAL STORIES
Of the LGBTQ+ community, trans people are at a higher risk for self-harm and external victimization. 

93% increase in tracked homicides of trans and gender-nonconforming people in the United States and Puerto Rico over the last four years. 

In 2021, 56 people were killed, compared to 29 reported deaths in 2017. While only 13% of the transgender community is estimated to be Black, “Black trans women accounted for nearly three-quarters of the known victims.” 

[Notes]
Of the LGBTQ+ community, trans people are at a higher risk for self-harm and external victimization A summary article released by CBS News states “Everytown's Transgender Homicide Tracker found that there was a 93% increase in tracked homicides of trans and gender-nonconforming people in the United States and Puerto Rico over the last four years. In 2021, 56 people were killed, compared to 29 reported deaths in 2017. Notably, while only 13% of the transgender community is estimated to be Black, according to UCLA School of Law's Williams Institute, Black trans women accounted for nearly three-quarters of the known victims.” 
We can see from these statistics that more than any other people group, trans people experience an excess of mental health and suicide concerns. This piece of the trans* experience can often be ignored or used as the explanation behind why an individual is experiencing gender incongruence. Neither provides holistic care for the individual. Frequently, transitioning is encouraged as a way to alleviate these mental health concerns. However, only a few longitudinal studies of transition outcomes have been conducted. The largest and most rigorous found that only 6% of those who transitioned experienced significant improvement in mental health. Interestingly, a majority of those with persisting mental health diagnosis actually developed those after transitioning. Unfortunately, evidence demonstrates that transition does not meaningfully improve mental health. Furthermore, some studies have shown that transitioning worsens mental and physical health. A study by the Karolinska Institute in Sweden found that those who transitioned experienced “substantially higher rates of overall mortality, death from cardiovascular disease and suicide, suicide attempts, and psychiatric hospitalizations” compared to the control group, with a subsequent study finding that elevated suicide risk persisted for ten or more years after transition. Further study is needed, but available evidence strongly suggests that transition is not the solution to suicide risk and may even exacerbate it. Instead, those offering care to trans people struggling with mental health challenges should first focus on addressing the mental illness directly with interventions proven to be effective while helping the trans person accept that transition is at best ineffective to address mental illness and at worst a contributor to mental illness.

QUESTIONS
1. How many of you have ever felt like you have fallen short of masculine/feminine expectations? But did any of you ever question whether you were supposed to be a boy or a girl? What if you genuinely did? What if there was an undeniable sense that your sex and gender didn’t match? How difficult would that make life?

2. How difficult would life be if you felt like you weren't right at a core level? If growing up you never felt like you belonged among the girls or the boys? If you faced huge developmental challenges because of your experience? If you faced one of the highest rates of suicide and hate crime among any American sub-population?
QUESTIONS
3. How difficult would life be if you read in the Bible that God makes people male or female but you feel like you are neither?  Do you think that would make it hard for you to love a God who allowed this to happen?

4. What if every time you got ready, every time you introduced yourself, every time you went to the bathroom, etc. you felt like you were living a lie?

5. What if someone asked you the following: How does dating work? When did you know? Have you had surgery? What was the surgery like? What do you do when you need to go to the bathroom? Do you have a penis?
DEFINING TERMS

[Notes]
Currently, around 1.6% of the US adult population identifies as transgender, and among those there is a great diversity of experiences. Transgender people may be straight, gay, bisexual, asexual, polysexual, pansexual, etc. According to a survey conducted by the National LGBTQ Task force and the National Center for Transgender Equality,”[t]wenty-three percent (23%) [of transgender people surveyed] said they were gay, lesbian, or same gender loving, 25% bisexual, 4% asexual and 23% queer (typically used as an umbrella term to avoid particular labels). Two percent (2%) said their sexual orientation was something else such as trans-attracted…(making a total of 77% non-straight trans* individuals) and twenty-three percent (23%) of trans participants identified as straight.” Some have taken steps to align their sex with their experienced gender, others have completely transitioned, and still others continue with a sex and gender that feel mismatched. Transgender people may identify as one gender, neither, both, or somewhere in between. Check out a full list of terms and definitions below:



Sex—Being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—Psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity (how you experience yourself and how masculine/feminine a person feels) and gender role (adoptions of cultural expectations for males/females). 

Gender Dysphoria – A medical term for a clinically impairing experience of distress associated with the incongruence wherein one’s psychological and emotional gender identity does not match one’s biological sex. Many in the transgender community push back against this term and use it as a diagnosis, claiming that it pathologizes the transgender experience as a mental disorder.

Gender Incongruence – An acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex

Transgender/Trans* – A general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence

Discomfort with Gender Overprescription – regardless of one's gender experience, individuals may notice that cultural prescriptions for gender roles are arbitrarily narrow, chafe at that overprescription, and search for alternative conceptions of gender that more accurately reflect universal and innate experiences. Trans* people will undoubtedly experience discomfort with gender overprescription in addition to their internal experience of gender incongruence. Cisgender people may also experience discomfort with gender overprescription absent an internal experience of gender incongruence. 



Transsexual – A term which refers to people who consider or use medical interventions such as hormone therapy or gender-affirming surgeries, also called sex reassignment surgery (SRS) or pursue medical interventions as part of the process of expressing their gender.

Third Sex or Third Gender – A term used to describe persons who are neither man nor woman, which could reference an intermediate state or another sex or gender or having qualities of both man/woman in oneself. 

18
TERMINOLOGY
FTM/F2M – An abbreviation of Female to Male; a transgender man. 

MTF/M2F– A trans woman/trans feminine person assigned male at birth. 
Assigned male at birth/AMAB – Used to refer to the biological sex of a trans woman. 
Assigned female at birth/AFAB- Used to refer to the biological sex of a trans man.

19
TERMINOLOGY
Passing – the act of presenting as cisgender or gender-typical, which is generally accomplished through conforming to stereotypical gender roles. 

Agender­ – Refers to a person who does not identify with or experience any gender. Bigender – A term used to identify a person whose gender identity encompasses two genders, (often man and woman, but not exclusively) or is moving between being two genders. 

Cisgender – A term used to refer to an individual whose gender identity aligns with the sex assigned to them at birth.

20
TERMINOLOGY
Nonbinary – Refers to people who do not subscribe to the gender binary. They might exist between or beyond the man-woman binary.

Gender Expansive­ – An umbrella term for those who do not follow gender stereotypes, or who expand ideas of gender expression or gender identity.

Genderfluid – A term used when a person wants to convey that their experience of gender is not fixed as either male/female but may either fluctuate along a continuum or encompass qualities of both gender identities.

21
TERMINOLOGY
Genderqueer – An umbrella term for ways in which people experience their gender identity outside of or in between a male-female binary.

Androgynous – Having physical elements of both femininity and masculinity and their gender presentation is a combination of both masculine and feminine elements, or neither. 

Cross-dressing – Dressing in the clothing or adopting the presentation of the opposite sex. Motivations for cross-dressing vary significantly.

22
TERMINOLOGY
Gender Bending – Intentionally crossing or “bending” gender roles.

Autogynephilia – Dressing or adopting the presentation of the other sex, typically for the purpose of sexual arousal (and may reflect a fetish quality). Such a person could experience gender dysphoria and some identify as transgender. Most transgender persons do not cross-dress for arousal and see transvestism as a different phenomenon than what they experience

23
TERMINOLOGY
Intersex – A term to describe conditions in which a person is born with sex characteristics or anatomy that does not allow clear identification as male or female. The causes of an intersex condition can be chromosomal, gonadal, or genital. Some of these conditions are Klinefelter Syndrome (XXY), Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (external female genitalia and an outward appearance as female but XY male chromosomes), Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (commonly XX chromosomes but male external genitalia), Hermaphroditism (both ovarian and testicular tissue), Turner Syndrome (XO), and Triple X Syndrome (XXX). Many intersex conditions make it unclear whether God intended…

[Notes]
This next section contains adjacent categories of sex and gender presentation that are not usually related to the trans* conversation but are important parts of queer culture and lived experiences of difference. These categories should not be conflated with the trans* experience but instead should be addressed separately with those who fall into these categories.



24
TERMINOLOGY
Drag Queen – A biological male who dresses as a female (typically flamboyant dress and appearance) for the purposes of entertaining others. Such a person may not experience gender dysphoria and does not tend to identify as transgender.

Drag King – A biological female who dresses as a male (stereotypic dress and appearance) for the purposes of entertaining others. As with drag queens, such a person may not experience gender dysphoria and does not tend to identify and transgender.
QUESTIONS
1. What terms are new to you?
2. Which are you most comfortable with? Least comfortable?
3. Were you aware that intersex people exist?
4. Why do you think the trans* community pushes back against the term “gender dysphoria”? 
THEOLOGY OF SEX & GENDER
What are sex and gender?
A person’s sex (male or female) is defined by his or her chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics.

A person’s gender (masculine or feminine) is comprised of the psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female.

[Notes]
Let’s start with some working definitions—a person’s sex (male or female) is defined by his or her chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics. These include the presence or absence of a Y chromosome, internal reproductive organs, external sexual anatomy, and endocrine systems that produce secondary sex characteristics. A person’s gender (masculine or feminine) is comprised of the psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity (how you experience yourself and how masculine/feminine a person feels) and gender role (adoptions of cultural expectations for males/females). The word transgender is often used as a general term for anyone whose experiences are defined by their gender identities differing from the gender associated with their biological sex. Transgender people experience gender incongruence and wrestle with finding congruence and harmony within their lived experiences.  


What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
The Bible promises to contain everything necessary and sufficient for salvation

God did not intend for the Bible to provide Christians with the answers to every question they might have about the Christian’s life

[Notes]
The Bible promises to contain everything necessary and sufficient for salvation, but God did not intend for the Bible to provide Christians with the answers to every question they might have about the Christian’s life. There is almost nothing the Bible says directly about gender incongruence, but there are several passages that address biological sex and gender expression that can serve as building blocks for a faithful response to gender incongruence. It should be noted here that passages on gender expression are typically addressing specific cultural norms and practices within the biblical context and should be adapted (with wisdom and discernment) to our current cultural context. 

What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
Genesis 1-3
Deuteronomy 22:5 & 23:1

Isaiah 56:1-5

[Notes]
Genesis 1-3 lays out for us a description of the creation narrative, including one of Adam and Eve. Importantly, God creates humans male and female, in His image, suggesting there is a sacred integrity to maleness and femaleness. While biological sex difference between Adam and Eve was not the only way they reflected the diverse complexity of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church, our bodies (including our given biological sex) are essential to bearing God’s image. God intended for us to bear His image. Interestingly, the Hebrew words for male and female are the same words used to describe the paired animals included in the ark to repopulate the world after the flood, suggesting that central to God’s design for humans was their complementary reproductive capacities given by their biological sex. As image-bearers, God created us each with a unique body that represents His craftsmanship and care that he puts into our physical being. It is important to note here that though we are created male and female, this passage is referring to biological sex and not gender.
These next two passages refer specifically to crossdressing (22:5) and male genital mutilation (23:1). With Deut. 22:5 (along with most of the law), the rules and prohibitions primarily focused on separation from the surrounding cultures and being “set apart” for the Lord. There were parts of the law that focused on bodily cleanliness, holiness regarding moral actions that involved treatment of creation, and physical representations of being set apart such as eating restrictions and not mixing different fabrics in clothing. In this context, crossdressing was a practice in Canaanite religious rituals used to worship their gods via fornication across gender bounds. This command, along with the rest of the law, is focusing on preventing morally corrupt behavior that would draw the Israelites away from God.
Deut. 23:1 speaks directly to male genital mutilation either through circumstances such as trampling or some other accidental form of mutilation or intentionally such as young boys being made into eunuchs for service to queens. This command falls within a series of laws relating to entering the presence and community of the Lord. However, we eventually see a reference to eunuchs by the prophet Isaiah and a resolution of this particular law in Acts 8 with the baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch.
In contrast to the exclusion of eunuchs found in Deuteronomy 23:1, Isaiah 56 promises the eunuch family, belonging, and honor: Instead of being excluded from Jewish worship, they will be included “within the walls of my house.” Instead of being forgotten and lost to history because they had no children, they will be remembered in a way greater than “sons and daughters could give.” Instead of being humiliated, they will be honored. Instead of rejected, welcomed. Instead of being exploited, cherished. Instead of being viewed and treated primarily by the nature of their brokenness, they will be named as a child of God because God will call out the image of God found at the core of their person. But these promises aren't just for literal eunuchs. Isaiah is a book of poetic prophecy, so the use of the word eunuch here has historically been understood as a promise particularly to celibate people without children. This passage has not been historically understood to contradict the Old Testament statement that genital mutilation is marring of God’s gift of one’s biological sex.


What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
Jeremiah 31:22

Matthew 19:3-12
Matthew 22:30

Acts 8:25-39

[Notes]
Jeremiah in this passage is referring to the current state of being in captivity in Babylon and that Israel as the weaker nation (represented by the woman) shall encompass Babylon, the stronger nation (represented by the man). Though other interpretations exist, this interpretation makes the most sense based on textual and historical context.
Here, Jesus is addressing the particulars of marriage and divorce, taking it a step further and stating that divorce was permitted by Moses but it was never seen as a right or allowance from God who set a high bar for marriage. In the same vein, singleness, or “eunuchhood,” has an equally high bar, and those who are able to accept either singleness/celibacy or marriage must do so knowing and understanding the weight and cost that comes with both relational vocations. Eunuch here is used as a metaphor to express the permanence of the kind of singleness he’s inviting his disciples to consider and the ways that singleness is meant to be in single-minded devotion to the King and building the King’s kingdom.
While this passage has historically been understood to suggest that there will be no romance, marriage, sex, or bearing of new children in heaven, there is no reason to assume that heaven will be a place without biological sex or gender. We know that the New Heavens and New Earth will be a physical city where we will live and worship in resurrected bodies. While the capacity for sex and procreation is a meaningful aspect of biological sexual differences, there are many other ways that the biological and social difference between men and women image the diversity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. Therefore, we expect that biological sex and gender will persist in the next life.
Here in Acts 8, we see a fulfillment and removal of the law that would have prohibited the Ethiopian eunuch from being in the presence of the Lord. We see his recognition of the Lord’s authority and desire for immediate baptism through his interaction with Philip. This is a clear recognition that even genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be brought into his family. To be clear, this passage does not explore the origins of the eunuch’s castration or suggest that his castration was a morally neutral act. Yet despite that sin (by whomever made him a eunuch), he is fully welcomed into God’s family.

What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
1 Corinthians 11:2-16

1 Cor 6:12-20
Galatians 3:27-28

[Notes]
Corinthians 11:2-16 explores standards for gender expression. These standards were, in part, a response to cross-dressing practices in cult prostitution, and many have understood Paul’s words to condemn the intention to deceive another about one’s biological sex. At a minimum, this passage affirms complementary gender expression by males and females, recognizing that men and women are different and that that difference should be honored in public. Few, though, would suggest that modern Christians must follow the specific standards described in this passage. And none would suggest that there is one, universal standard for how male and female Christians in all places and all times should properly display their maleness and femaleness. Most would recognize that since God intended gender-differentiated expression, those standards will be culturally-bound and different for different people in different times and places. Which humans, then, determine those standards for each time and place? A person’s pastor? A particular denomination? A popular public theologian? The pope? As this line of questioning suggests, in pluralistic and ecumenical societies like the modern United States of America, identifying who has the authority to prescribe standards for gender expression may be impossible, and local leaders should hesitate to take up that authority. At the very least, Christian leaders can employ this passage to discourage expression that is intended to mislead an observer about the biological sex of the individual.

A popular passage that is used to address a wide variety of topics is this one about our bodies being holy temples for the Lord. For the purpose of this conversation, we’re going to focus specifically on how our physical bodies are given by God and created uniquely. We are called to steward what we are given by God and sometimes, we choose to do things with our bodies that do not faithfully steward what he has given us. However, through grace, we are able to continue being faithful stewards even when we sin or are sinned against through our bodies. We also have a hope that though we live in a broken world with broken bodies, we will be given a heavenly body one day that is glorified and perfect. Does this mean we do what we want with our bodies here on earth? Certainly not. It does mean that we are to use our bodies to glorify and represent Christ as best as we can on this earth. What that looks like may be different for everyone and should be done prayerfully in healthy community that will spur you on towards Him.

Here, Paul is not advocating for the removal of gender altogether. Rather, he is advocating for equality and unity within the body of Christ. This is meant to be a unifying factor regardless of gender, social status, age, or ethnicity. This is a hard truth for many to accept, that all are welcome into the family of God no matter the background.

Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?
The Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD)

Ishtar: Known for blurring gender expression

Iphis

[Notes]
Interestingly, biblical authors were aware of individuals who were biologically one sex but presented as someone of the opposite sex and individuals whose sexual anatomy had been surgically altered. The Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) dressed as a woman when trying to entice men, worked in brothels as a woman, and dressed as a bride and gave himself away as a wife when he married a male slave. Ancient Mesopotomaian cult practices included biological men whose “appearance either was feminine or had both male and female characteristics,” corresponding to a deity named Ishtar who was known for blurring gender expression. Similar cult practices were seen in Phrygia where men were castrated, dressed as women, and played feminine roles in society. Just before the events of the New Testament, Ovid wrote about a biological girl named Iphis whose mother raised her as a boy. Iphis finds herself attracted to women, asks the gods to transform her into a male, and her wish is granted. 

Examples in the Bible of men and women breaking gender stereotypes
Men in the Bible
Weeping: Psalm 51:10-11
Tenderheartedness: Micah 6:8
Physical/emotional connections: 1 Samuel 18:1-3




Women in the Bible
Cunning and entrepreneurial: Proverbs 31
Strong leaders: Judges 4:4
Wealthy and learned: Acts 16:14

[Notes]
The Bible is full of examples of men and women breaking gender stereotypes. Throughout the Bible, men are called to exemplify and reflect emotional states such as weeping (Psalm 51:10-11 “Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from your presence and take not your Holy Spirit from me.”), tenderheartedness (Micah 6:8 “He has told you, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of you but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God?”) sensitivity to those around them, keeping peace, and showing deep affection for others through their physical and emotional connections (I Samuel 18:1-3 “As soon as he had finished speaking to Saul, the soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. And Saul took him that day and would not let him return to his father's house. Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul.”).
Women also break many stereotypes. Proverbs 31 pictures a cunning, entrepreneurial businesswoman who works hard to provide for her family, and both the Old and New Testaments contain examples such as Deborah (Judges 4:4), Lydia (Acts 16:14), Rahab (Joshua 2, 6:22-25), Ruth and Naomi (Ruth 1:16 “Do not urge me to leave you or to return from following you. For where you go I will go, and where you lodge I will lodge. Your people shall be my people, and your God my God.”), along with many other wealthy women that helped support Jesus’ ministry. Jesus Himself broke stereotypes by daring to associate with “sinful women'' (Luke 7:47,50 Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much… And he said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”), and He even revealed His deity for the first time to the Samaritan woman at the well who would have been seen as the lowest of the low.
What were God’s intentions for sex and gender? 
Complementarity through:
Marriage
Singleness
Community

[Notes]
“He created them male and female”
 
God is a being-in-relation in the Trinity, delighting in communion with the other members of the Trinity.[John 1] We find diversity and complementarity in the Trinity.  God created humankind in His image to be beings-in-relation to each other, to desire communion with God and others, and to be diverse and complementary.[Genesis 1 & 2; 2 Corinthians 13:14] There are many ways in which humankind interact as beings-in-relation, and there are many sources of diversity and complementarity in the Body of Christ.[1 Corinthians 12]
 
One source of diversity and complementarity is biological sex and gender (being made male and female and the ways we experience and express our sex) and one such way that humankind interact as male and female beings-in-relation is marriage. Eve was made from Adam in such a way that Adam and Eve complemented each other (however, in more ways than just their sexuality) for God saw that it was not good for a human to be alone.[Genesis 2:18]

However, marriage is not the only way males and females can express connection and community with one another. John lays out a level of familial bonds that exceeds biological relations when, at the cross, “Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, ‘Woman, behold, your son!’” (John 19:26).  We see in Jesus’s ministry the love that He has for His twelve disciples but also the connections and relationships He has with the women who follow His ministry, such as Mary and Martha. Finally, Acts 2 lays out for us the role that the local church plays in providing community and connection beyond gender and age bounds. We see at the beginning the church sharing all things with one another, providing for one another's needs, and glorifying the Lord through their generosity and praise. 
Marriage has often been touted as the ultimate form of connection and unity. Yet Jesus shows us that diversity and complementarity is more than just a nuclear family. It is a community of believers, a faith family, that incorporates individuals who are single, married, young, old, male, and female. Through this diversity, we become family for the outcast, have a wide range of gifts and talents to share with one another and the world while building the kingdom, and provide community and support for one another in good times and bad.
To what extent did God prescribe gender? What did He leave for us to define?
What it means to be male or female is to accept: 
one’s maleness or femaleness
one’s created potential to relate in that way to the other
God didn't intend for anything else to be universally masculine or feminine.

[Notes]
At the very least, sex and gender are important. What it means to be male or female is to accept (1) one’s maleness or femaleness and (2) one’s created potential to relate in that way to the other. This also highlights the ways that a person can reject his or her sex and gender: rejecting their maleness or femaleness outright, enjoying sex outside of the covenant of marriage, or engaging in marriage covenants with individuals of the same sex. Beyond this, God didn't intend for anything else to be universally masculine or feminine. He expected and even invited humans, with our authority and responsibility, to care for and rule over Creation, to create beautiful cultures, and to express our differences within those patterns of masculine and feminine expression. Additional, man-made gender prescriptions do not have moral weight and frequently change from generation to generation. We can recognize the variety and differences within humans as created image bearers and celebrate the ways in which our differences can uniquely glorify God. 

How are sex and gender broken biologically and culturally?
Unfortunately, all is broken. Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our maleness or femaleness. Our understanding of gender is also broken.

God did not intend to define gender completely.

[Notes]
Unfortunately, all is broken
 
When God first imagined each of us, He created us to be perfect in every way, including our maleness or femaleness.[Genesis 2; Psalm 139] But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin.[ Psalm 51; Romans 5] Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our maleness or femaleness. We should not be surprised, then, when we find our sex broken at a genetic level or our gender broken by contributions from both nature and nurture. As in the case of the thorn in Paul’s side, being faithful Christians doesn’t mean that God resolves all of our brokenness in this lifetime.[2 Corinthians 12]
 
If everything in this world is broken, then our understanding of gender is also broken. When we search the Bible for prescriptions about perfect maleness and femaleness, we are only provided with perfect examples in the Garden of Eden before the Fall, in prophecy about the New Heaven and the New Earth, and in Jesus. Beyond that, we are provided with examples in the context of a broken world where it is unclear whether the prescriptions given describe perfection or the next good step on the path toward perfection.[Philemon; Webb, William, Slaves, Women, & Homosexuals]
 
Because most examples we have of what it means to be male or female are imperfect, it is difficult to prescribe what correct gender is beyond those previously described: to accept one’s maleness or femaleness, to accept one’s created potential to relate in that way to the other, and to refrain from rejecting one’s maleness or femaleness. Perhaps, as many theologians have concluded, God did not intend to define gender completely but instead left some of that up to man in much the same way that God gave to Adam the task of naming the animals.[Genesis 2; Roberts, Christopher C., Creation & Covenant, 146]

How are sex and gender broken biologically and culturally?
By the 1970s, children wore mostly gender-neutral clothing and there was no sense of colors being associated with one gender or another.

But retailers sought to increase sales by marketing higher-priced, gender-differentiated clothes, blankets, and toys.

[Notes]
The problem with Man’s definition of gender
 
Is pink a girl color? Is blue a boy color? 100 years ago, pink was considered the more masculine color because of its resemblance to red, and blue was considered dainty. By the 1970s, children wore mostly gender-neutral clothing and there was no sense of colors being associated with one gender or another. But once science allowed parents to learn a child’s sex long before birth, retailers sought to increase sales by marketing higher-priced, gender-differentiated clothes, blankets, and toys so that parents would spend more money preparing a baby’s room—including differentiating these items by color Our society has attributed some colors to one gender or another despite colors preferences being unrelated to gender. Even more, studies have shown that within a culture, there is more variance among men and among women than between men and women, suggesting that it is difficult to define statistically significant differences between men and women categorically. This is not because gender isn’t real but because gender as we experience it is broken and only one of many sources of diversity in the Body of Christ.
 
What happens when we ascribe something to gender that has nothing to do with gender? Say a boy prefers the color pink: pink toys, pink clothing, pink blankets. Parents often respond with a forced choice for the child: either reject your preference for pink and choose to be a boy, or continue to prefer pink and experience shame. How much gender nonconformity is due to ascribing to gender preferences that have nothing to do with gender at all? How much shame, rejection, and confusion do these forced choices create in children? How often do these feelings lead a child to identify with the opposite sex in order to reconcile his or her preferences with society’s expectations? All in this world must be redeemed, including our concepts of gender. We would do well to resist opportunities to assign gender to preferences. I do not suggest that we deconstruct gender, but that we purge it of aspects that have nothing to do with gender so that the true nature of gender may be discovered. As described earlier, we can point to few prescriptions in Scripture about gender, and we can easily point out some things that have been mistakenly ascribed to gender. The challenge comes, as in all things, with those characteristics in the middle which we will discuss more in depth later in this training.
 
When Christians talk about the Bible and gender, they often cite passages that forbid same-sex sexual behavior, participating in rituals practiced by other cultures (genital mutilation), and cross-dressing. But importantly, none of these passages address a person that (1) genuinely feels incongruence about his or her gender, (2) is clearly biologically male or female, and (3) isn’t exhibiting same-sex sexual behavior, cross-dressing, or genital mutilation. We have no clear instructions about how to approach that situation. How might this challenge the way we respond to gender minorities in our churches?

How can the Christian appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
Christian psychologist Mark Yarhouse has suggested that there are three lenses through which Christian can view and seek to understand gender incongruence: the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.
 
The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of gender incongruence and how Christians respond. Generally, when the Christian uses the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask, “What actions are sins? What actions are seemingly morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?” If a Christian seeks to understand gender incongruence exclusively through the integrity lens, the Christian should primarily explore whether different steps of social, hormonal, and surgical transition are sins or not.
The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people. When Christians view gender incongruence through the disability lens, they recognize that gender incongruence is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world, but those navigating gender incongruence do not choose to experience incongruence nor is there a reliable method for eliminating gender incongruence. Christians seeking to understand gender incongruence through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches to care for trans people with God’s love and wisdom as those trans people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.
The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ. When Christians who hold a progressive gender ethic view gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they see the trans experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God. However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they ask how Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ particularly from stewarding their brokenness (while recognizing that God did not intend gender incongruence or for gender incongruence to image God).
As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand gender incongruence through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate. Like a kaleidoscope, we appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence when we stack all three lenses on top of each other and seek to understand gender incongruence through them simultaneously. There are simultaneously moral questions, an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence with the support they need to thrive, and an opportunity to recognize and appreciate the spiritual gifts trans Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus. If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses, we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses, with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens. This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating gender incongruence to do so faithfully.
How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God's intention? Can it change? 
Gender incongruence is a combination of genetic/developmental factors (nature) as well as cultural and familial influences (nurture).

80% percent of those who experience gender incongruence as a child see resolution by adulthood.

[Notes]
Like many things in life, gender incongruence is a combination of mental and developmental factors (nature) as well as cultural and familial influences (nurture). No one study points to a particular reason or source for why gender incongruence happens. For most people, it is a combination of multiple factors that are typically experienced from an early age.
Interestingly, eighty percent of those who experience gender incongruence as a child see resolution as the individual grows and matures.  However in about twenty percent of cases, gender incongruence persists.
If an individual sees gender incongruence persisting beyond adolescence and into adulthood, it is likely going to be a lifelong experience. To be clear, desisting incongruence does not mean that the child’s gender incongruence was ingenuine or that the child was merely confused. It is important to note that there is also no way to know for sure if gender incongruence will resolve and as such, the experience should not be dismissed regardless of the age of the person experiencing incongruence. 


Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.

Every person experiences brokenness in one way or another. We as believers should be driven to show love and compassion.

[Notes]
God did not intend for anyone to experience gender incongruence. Gender incongruence is a brokenness and one of many manifestations of the brokenness of all of creation as a result of the Fall. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin. Gender incongruence may tempt a person to soothe their discomfort in sinful ways or attempt to sinfully remake God’s gift of their biological sex, but a person does not sin until they say “yes” to temptation in thought, word, or deed. Every person experiences brokenness in one way or another, and because we all experience the hurt and pain that are byproducts of this brokenness, we as believers should be driven to show love and compassion. Certainly, in an ideal world people would not experience gender incongruence. Yet the beauty of God and His power is that our brokenness does not keep us from His love and grace because of His son, Jesus Christ. He is able to take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power. 
KEY QUESTION:If someone experiences gender incongruence, what determines who they are? Why?

[Notes]
When a Christian asks, “Who am I, fundamentally? Who did God create me to be? How does God see me?” the individual is asking a question of ontology. Then, the Christian’s appreciation for God’s intentions should guide how they faithfully respond to the broken world they experience.
As we’ve already stated, when God first imagined each of us born unblemished into a perfect world, He imagined each of us as either masculine men or feminine women. But we live in a broken world, and some experience a distressing incongruence between their biological sex and felt gender. Which reflects God’s intentions? Which is broken? And how then should the trans Christian faithfully manage that brokenness?


KEY QUESTION: Who am I?
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender is broken.

Unfortunately, the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions.

[Notes]
if an individual is not intersex and their chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics all indicate the same biological sex, then we know God’s intentions for the individual’s biological sex. Plus, when we know God’s intentions for an individual’s biological sex, we also know His intentions for their gender. So when a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender is broken. We know that God intended to gift them with a particular sex and gender, and we know that their gender has been negatively impacted by the Fall. 
For example, if a person is biologically male (with XY chromosomes, testes, a penis, facial and chest hair, pelvic build–lack of rounded hips, upper body muscular build, and the ability to generate muscle mass at a faster rate than females), then God intended for that person to be biologically male and feel mentally/psychologically like a man. If this male experiences gender incongruence and, as such, does not feel robustly like a man and instead feels more like a woman or somewhere in between a man and a woman, we know that their gender has been negatively impacted by the brokenness of Creation caused by sin. We know that God intended to offer this male his maleness and a sense of being a man as a sacred gift, but unfortunately the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions for the male’s gender.
Are our brains sexed? Could many trans people have a brain-sex/body-sex difference, be considered intersex, and God's intentions for the sex and gender therefore be unknown?
What about brain-sex/body-sex difference?

[Notes]
Before diving into this section, we want to emphasize that this can be a difficult and often painful topic to address for trans* individuals, especially teens. We also want to acknowledge that this particular conversation will look different for intersex persons, but should be addressed gently and compassionately regardless. In recent years, queer theorists have suggested that the brains of males and females are categorically different in ways that determine their experience of their gender. The brain develops much earlier in the mother’s womb than the rest of the body, and male brains are exposed to a hormone bath of testosterone that female brains are not. As a result, theorists have suggested that a primary source of a trans experience could be a brain-sex body-sex difference, where a biological male develops a male body but for some reason develops the brain of a female. Because the brain and the rest of the body develop at different times in a mother’s womb, it is hypothetically possible that an atypical hormone bath during brain development could cause it to develop contrary to its genetic material. If such a brain-sex/body-sex difference were discovered among trans people, one could argue that those trans people are actually intersex. And as we have already discussed, God’s intention for the sex of a intersex person is not clear, so the wisdom for how the intersex Christian should faithfully steward their gender would be less clear.
Are our brains sexed, then? And could a meaningful number of trans people have a brain-sex/body-sex difference?
Available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex.

Research has shown that the variation among male brains and among female brains is greater than the differences between the average male and female brain.
What about brain-sex/body-sex difference?

[Notes]
 Limited studies have been conducted to explore this theory. The results of some suggest that trans people have brains more similar to people of the opposite sex. Other studies show that trans people have brains more similar to people of the same sex. Moreover, the studies that found trans people to have brains more similar to people of the opposite sex either suffered from a small sample size, surveyed participants who had already taken cross-sex hormones, studied participants with HIV/AIDS, or followed participants who had already lived for years as someone of the opposite sex. In short, the credibility of those studies is widely doubted. In contrast, studies of biological females who received a wash of testosterone in utero found that while they were more likely to report masculine-typical behaviors and interests, they were not more likely to identify as male or experience gender dysphoria. A further analysis of gender identity and prenatal hormone exposure found that prenatal androgens had “large effects on interests and engagements in gendered activities, moderate effects on spatial abilities; and relatively small or no effects on gender identity, gender cognitions, and gendered peer involvement.”
In conclusion, available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex (and therefore leave God’s intentions for their biological sex unclear).
In contrast, consistent research has shown that while there are physical differences on average between male and female brains, the variation among male brains and among female brains are greater than the differences between the average male and female brain. This variance is natural, but does not predict gender incongruence or make a person any more or less male or female. God created us each uniquely and beautifully. Our differences and our commonalities reflect God’s handiwork and His intentionality with us. 
Social transitioning: name and/or pronoun changes, clothing, hairstyle, wrapping/taping, packing, bathroom use, voice training, etc.
Hormonal transitioning: chemically altering secondary sex characteristics to align with gender identity
Surgical transitioning: breasts augmentation, change facial features, vocal cord surgeries, altering genitalia
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) is a sin.

Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
If a person who experiences gender incongruence is not intersex, if we know God’s intentions for the individual’s sex and gender, and if we know that the person’s gender is broken whereas their sex is as God intended, taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex can be sinful. When a trans Christian undergoes hormonal or surgical transition, they are at risk of responding to broken gender by breaking their biological sex and not being grateful for God’s gift of their sex and faithfully managing their broken gender.
However, in the range of steps considered social transition, the morality of many of those actions depends on the motivation behind the action. Few of them are inherently sinful. Each step of social transition could be taken as part of a rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex, or each step of social transition could be taken merely to reduce the distress of a person’s gender incongruence while affirming internally and externally that they are ontologically the biological sex that God intended. 

Transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.

What will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender? 
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
Some might say, “Transition saves lives. Inviting trans Christians to consider the moral implications of transition will only lead to more suicide. The risk of suicide is reason enough to set aside God’s wisdom.” But, as we’ve already noted, consistent evidence shows that transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.
Earlier, a trans Christian seeking to faithfully steward their sex and gender was offered as the point of reference. In an ideal world, a trans Christian would consider the moral implications of transition from a place of positive mental health, a robust relationship with Jesus, compassionate church discipleship, and robust support from friends and family. Unfortunately, this has rarely been the case. Many have taken steps to transition in times of mental unhealth, before knowing Jesus, after leaving the Christian faith, without compassionate support, and/or amid harassment from people who call themselves Christians. When offering discipleship to trans people, as will be covered later with greater nuance, conversations about the morality of social/medical transition will rarely be a first or early conversation in pastoral care that imitates Christ’s love. 
Additionally, just because someone chooses to medically transition does not remove their ability to image God and represent Him to the world. We all make sinful decisions that affect our lives in significant ways, yet we also know that God takes our sin and brokenness and redeems it for His glory and our good.
Finally, any conversation about the morality of transition and the steps trans people take to address their distress isn’t complete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century. Christians have overprescribed gender roles and rules, creating (in part) gender incongruence in some instances and amplifying gender incongruence in other instances. While conservative advocates might accuse progressive advocates of Gnosticism by falling into mind/body dualism and valuing the mind over the body, it could equally be argued that conservative advocates often fall into the reserve trap of valuing the body over the mind. Even if we know that a trans person’s body is as God intended and it is the mind that is broken, a person’s gender is just as central to who they are. Enduring broken gender is just as devastating and deserving of compassion as enduring a broken body. If Christian leaders are going to invite trans Christians to honor God’s gift of their biological sex by refraining from hormonal/surgical transition and instead enduring the pain of their broken gender (even when that wisdom is true and will be better for those trans Christians in the long-term), those Christian leaders are still calling trans Christians to something profoundly difficult, made more difficult by decades of gender overprescription by Christian leaders. Bearing that moral responsibility, what will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender? 
QUESTIONS
What do you believe the Bible describes as universal masculinity and femininity?
To what extent has the wider culture informed our American Christian concepts of masculinity and femininity?
“Broken gender leads to forced-choice moments: either reject your preferences and be a Christian or continue your preference and experience shame (in both)” – When have you seen this?
SECULAR & PROGRESSIVE RESPONSES

50
SECULAR/PROGRESSIVE
Many affirm the existence of a gender binary but merely believe that their physical body does not match the gender of their mind, soul, or spirit. Advocates for this perspective want to preserve the distinction between men and women while allowing people to conform their bodies to their gender. 

The second perspective rejects the gender binary altogether. Advocates for this perspective want to deconstruct any distinction between men and women, seeing them as arbitrary labels that ignore the wide range of genders along a spectrum.

[Notes]
Secular worldviews on gender identity questions are diverse but can be distilled into two, seemingly contradictory, camps.
First, many affirm the existence of a gender binary but merely believe that their physical body does not match the gender of their mind, soul, or spirit. Advocates for this perspective, such as Caitlyn Jenner, want to preserve the distinction between men and women while allowing people to conform their bodies to their gender. Some note that this response to gender incongruence actually deepens gender stereotypes and increases distress for those who do not feel like transition is the right step for them.
The second perspective rejects the gender binary altogether. Often younger transgender people, advocates for this perspective want to deconstruct any distinction between men and women, seeing them as arbitrary labels that ignore the wide range of genders along a spectrum.
Ultimately, the “solutions to the problem” that each perspective advocates for are contradictory and compete against each other. One seeks to maintain the gender binary while the other seeks to deconstruct it. This complicates a Christian’s response to secular worldviews regarding gender incongruence because secular progressives offer multiple, opposing explanations.

51
SECULAR/PROGRESSIVE
Queer theorists tended to cast a skeptical eye on the transsexual sector of the transgender community

Christians can choose to follow whatever gender ethic they feel is most fair and true

We should humbly resist the urge to over-prescribe the meaning of universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity

[Notes]
As the editors of Understanding Transgender Identities: Four Views explain, “an increasingly common area of criticism leveled against queer theory [is] that it frequently disregards the lived experiences of the very people it appeals to in its theoretical arguments. More specifically, from early on queer theorists tended to cast a skeptical eye on the transsexual sector of the transgender community. The reason for this is simple. The reported experience of many transsexuals is that their true self, which they often describe in terms of an innate and unchanging gender identity, is trapped in the ‘wrong body’ (i.e. the wrong biological sex). But this sort of claim appears to depend on something like a fixed, essentialist identity and the male/female sex binary, which runs afoul of the central convictions of queer theory. This explains why many trans activists who embrace queer theory have often expressed attitudes toward SRS (Sexual Reassignment Surgery) ranging from ambivalence to outright disdain...."
Then some progressive Christians embrace secular philosophies toward gender incongruence. Some simply claim that the Bible isn’t binding or authoritative for modern Christians, so Christians can choose to follow whatever gender ethic they feel is most fair and true. Other progressive Christians argue that the mention and embrace of eunuchs in the New Testament signals that genital alteration has been made holy by Jesus, in addition to claims that there will be no gender or biological sex in heaven (therefore whatever a person feels is most authentic should be accommodated).
We as Christians would be wise to reject broken, cultural definitions of gender while continuing to maintain that males and females are different biologically/physically in ways that lead to differences psychologically/spiritually. Still, we should humbly resist the urge to over-prescribe the meaning of universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity and focus instead on how each person can reflect and image God uniquely as individuals and as members of the body of Christ. 

QUESTIONS
How do the “two camps” of secular worldviews on this topic make a Christian response difficult?

Does the Christian response outlined seem orthodox? Nuanced? Robust?
HOW TO MINISTER
General posture for ministry
Every trans person, or rather, every person is their own unique individual, made in the image of God who greatly loves them.

They need to know that you will walk with them AND that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life.

[Notes]
It’s easy to use that which you don’t understand as a target for jokes, sermon illustrations, blame shifting, or just a focal point for anger and fear. Remember that every trans person, or rather, every person regardless of their life and experience, is their own unique individual. Each person you meet has their own story to tell, their own joys and sorrows, difficulties and triumphs, ways that God has allowed them to suffer and ways that God has provided abundantly. Trans people are no different. They are not just a statistic on a screen, a political agenda, or a piece of legislature in the senate. They are people made in the image of God who are valued greatly by Him, and we, as His church, should greatly value trans people as well.
We know that for trans people around the world, mental health issues and suicide rates are higher than any other category in the LGBTQIA+ community. This should be alarming because this means that a majority of these people see their lives as not valuable and worthy of care or relationship. "Transition or suicide" vs "just be normal" (neither works forever, we need to believe that this is their experience, that they did nothing to bring it about, that it probably won't change, and that faithfully stewarding this will be costly and require support). Pastor and parent, these people need your care and respect. They need to know that you will walk with them and help them discern what is the most faithful way for them to live out their gender incongruence. More than that, they need the knowledge that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life and that while it is hard and difficult to live in a world (and a body) broken by sin, brokenness will not be our experience forever; we have a hope and a future unmarred by sin. 



What to do with suicide rates and mental illness rates
Ensure that they have
Solid community
A Therapist or counselor
Medication if necessary

[Notes]
Caring for people means caring for them holistically. Those who experience gender incongruence frequently have many other mental health problems that must be addressed first. Because suicide is such a high risk as well, addressing the safety and ongoing support of those who are suicidal should take top priority. Ensuring they have solid community, a therapist, and medication if necessary is a key part of helping these individuals get to a healthy place where they are better prepared and able to address their gender incongruence as well. 
AFTER addressing mental health challenges…
Recognize lack of choice. 
Accept enduring brokenness. 
Understand Sources of Gender Incongruence
Profound Sex/Gender Incongruence
Childhood Shame from Gender Atypical Preferences
Rejection of Broken Gender

[Notes]
1: Transgender people do not choose to experience gender incongruence. Rebellion is rarely a primary source of gender incongruence for a transgender person with persisting, genuine cross-gender identification. Many transgender people endure significant distress due to their gender incongruence—why would they choose that? Cross-gender identification or behavior is a reflection of broken gender.
Transgender people do not choose to experience gender incongruence, but they do have the responsibility to respond to and steward them faithfully. To experience gender incongruence is morally neutral, but a person’s response will have moral dimensions. In general, an individual should be encouraged to resolve what they can and manage what they must. While gender incongruence resolves by adulthood for most, gender incongruence continues without resolution for many.[Yarhouse, 92] Gender incongruence is the result of living in a fallen world that can’t be completely resolved until Christ returns.[2 Corinthians 12:7-9]
Get to know the individual and his or her story to understand the extent to which their gender incongruence is a profound sense that they are the wrong biological sex, childhood shame from gender atypical preferences, a comfort with their biological sex but rejection of cultural stereotypes, and/or an attempt to explain other mental health challenges (and how to respond/engage with each). Remember that gender incongruence is often a complex combination of multiple factors. An understanding of the source(s) does not mean immediate resolution or an easy fix, and it also does not mean that the individual even wants you to be a part of the process with them. Regardless of the level of connection, trust and rapport is important in seeking to care well for trans people no matter what stage of discerning and transition they are at. Discipleship takes time, effort, and investment which can be hard and complicated, but a willingness to walk faithfully with the Lord and with community starts when people know that you care for them. 

2: Some individuals genuinely feel that their mind, soul, or spirit does not match the rest of their body. While external conflicts may arise around changing one’s name, using different pronouns, using a different bathroom, and taking medical and/or surgical steps to change one’s body—the primary conflict is internal: how do people feel on the inside and experience themselves? We must recognize that the challenges that transgender people face are great. The Church is not asking those who experience same-sex attraction to change their attractions—we are only asking them to follow God’s wisdom by refraining from same-sex sexual and romantic activity. But we cannot ask a transgender person to not have a name, not use pronouns, not go to the bathroom, not wear clothes, not have a pitch to their voice, not groom their hair, not go through puberty, etc. Transgender people who chose to steward their gender incongruence by conforming to cultural gender expectations cannot merely refrain from action—they make daily, unavoidable, and painful choices that feel alien and reject their genuine preferences.

3: Many trans individuals have been wounded psychologically by our broken cultural definitions of gender. When an individual has a preference for something unrelated to his or her sex but ascribed by culture to one gender or another, they feel forced to choose: (1) reject your preferences and internalize shame and rejection or (2) reject the label of boy or girl and experience overt shame and rejection. Regardless of how the individual responds, broken gender leads to people broken by shame and rejection. Pastors and parents can help transgender people identify these experiences of shame and rejection, cast out those harmful messages, and replace them with beliefs that affirm their dignity and the beauty of God’s creation.
As discussed previously, Western culture has historically ascribed preferences to gender that have nothing to do with gender. Part of their gender experience may be discomfort with gender overprescription and search for alternative conceptions of gender that more accurately reflect universal and innate experiences. Pastors and parents can care for transgender people by allowing space for them to reject broken, cultural definitions of gender. We can join them in resisting historical over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between men and women. Gender stereotypes exacerbate feelings of incongruence for people in society and in the church. Frequently the church has allowed culture to influence what gender is supposed to look like or how it is to be lived out within church and society. It’s important to recognize that while each society has a different emphasis on gender norms and stereotypes, we as Christians are called to look beyond the world and encourage each other to represent Christ well through how we live regardless of gender. Shifting the focus not on gender, but on how all of us are image bearers and have something unique to bring to the Church and to the world can help bring a holistic and future-focused perspective on what the church is and can provide for Christians and non-christians alike. 
What should trans Christians call themselves? What names/pronouns should pastors/ministers use?
Given names and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of the pain and tension that is felt every day.

Identifying as trans can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence” or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between).

[Notes]
 Navigate identity carefully
Additionally, we need to encourage the trans Christians in our congregations to share their story and navigate their cross-gender identification or behavior within the context of the Body of Christ. Individuals that find the courage to understand and redeem—instead of ignore—their cross-gender identification can find great spiritual growth, meaning in their suffering, identity in Christ, and intimacy in a community of allies and others with similar experiences. Christians faithfully stewarding their cross-gender identification can offer the body of Christ a unique perspective and use that perspective to do impactful Kingdom work.
Many people have a wide variety of opinions and beliefs when it comes to names/pronouns and identifying as trans*. For those who experience gender incongruence, their given name and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of that pain and tension that is felt every day. Some experience meaningful relief from that tension when they adopt different pronouns and/or names.
Identifying as trans, similar to identifying as gay, bi, lesbian, etc. can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence” or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between). For those using the word trans merely to communicate that they experience gender incongruence, that identity helps others know and understand that this is a part of who the person is but does not encompass the whole of who they are. It can also open up the possibility for deeper conversation around the topic of faith and gender especially if this person is a Christian.
Pastors and parents should be willing and ready to respond graciously and to explore with the individual what their name, preferred pronouns,and use of the word trans means to them. In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality. Listen to the identifiers, names, and pronouns that the individual uses, and then use those same words as an act of hospitality. You might ask the individual what they mean when they use those words. Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings, but instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language. This is a simple but effective way to diffuse potential tension early in the relationship and open the door for future conversation.
Prayer and discernment should be an important part of the relationship and if they are willing to do so, walk with them through how changing their name and pronouns can be honoring and/or dishonoring to God and what He is doing in their life. Furthermore, be open to how God can and will change your own heart toward the matter at hand. Above all, let your posture be one of grace and love towards those who are created in His image. 

How to talk to your children about gender incongruence
Teach them that God made them the biological sex, that they are and that their biological sex is good, and that names, pronouns, and bathroom usage don’t have anything to do with one’s felt sense of gender.

Reject broken cultural definitions of gender. Resist the urge to overprescribe what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are.

[Notes]
At this point in the training, the parents, kids’ ministers, and youth pastors in the room may be asking, “But what about our kids? What does all this mean for them? In light of the theology and general posture toward ministry, here’s how Equip would encourage you to engage with this topic with kids. As this training isn’t focused on kids, this section will be very brief; for a fuller seminar on how to talk to young kids about sexual stewardship, I highly encourage you to take Equip’s Parent Course which includes a full two-hour session devoted to biological sex and gender. You can find out more at equipyourcommunity.org/ParentCourse.
All kids
Before kids are even old enough to know their own biological sex or gender (which typically happens between 18 months and 3 years of age), teach them that God made them the biological sex that they are and that their biological sex is good. (*This advice assumes that the child does not have an intersex condition that makes the determination of biological sex difficult or impossible.)
Teach that names, pronouns, and bathroom usage don’t have anything to do with one’s felt sense of gender. Our name is given to us by our parents. We use the pronouns and bathrooms associated with our biological sex because they’re a reflection of our biological sex only.
Reject broken cultural definitions of gender while continuing to maintain that males and females are different biologically/physically in ways that lead to differences psychologically/spiritually, and humbly resist the urge to overprescribe what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are.
Extra-biblical rules and roles obscure the truth about what it really means to follow Jesus as a boy/man or a girl/woman. When leaders who think they’ve parsed out all the differences between men and women over-prescribe gender roles or insist men and women follow rigid gender rules, our kids get hurt. They either become proud because they think they’re crushing it, or the rules crush them when they can’t live up to them or suffocate under them. We strive to point to Christ, not prove our gender.


How to talk to your children about gender incongruence
If not gender roles or tight boxes around masculinity and femininity, what are we supposed to teach our boys and girls about their sex and their gender?

Teach boys and girls the gospel and follow God’s commands for all believers. Help them recognize their giftings and callings.

[Notes]
Everything else is secondary to the gospel. It is the gospel that informs how we are to live.

Scripture describes holiness, godliness, and Christian living in universal terms. There aren’t separate lists of commands/virtues for males and females. 

(Side note: none of the gifts mentioned in Romans 12:3-8 or 1 Corinthians 12:4-11 are gendered.) Help them find what they’re passionate about, what relational vocation God may be calling them into, where they best fit into ministry, where they can use their gifts and talents for the kingdom.

Affirm that your boy is a boy regardless of his mannerisms, expression, personality, interests, voice pitch, clothing choices, or anything else, because the body God gave him is that of a boy. Affirm that your girl is a girl regardless of her mannerisms, expression, personality, interests, hair length, clothing choices, or anything else, because the body God gave her is that of a girl. Speak positively about being a girl or being a boy. Remind your children often that their bodies are good because God created them, that God was intentional about creating boys and girls.

Boys and girls are inherently different and will have different experiences growing up; culture treats boys and girls differently. And we’ll need to parent in response to those cultural influences and innate differences.
For example, men are, on average, physically stronger than women, so we teach our boys that their physical strength isn’t for taking what they want by force, but is to be used to serve those around them. We teach our boys to love and appreciate their body, but to know that their looks, athleticism, strength, and gifting are not the measure of their worth. What they are interested in or how they dress doesn’t make them masculine. They are valuable because God created them, and they are masculine because God created them male. And we teach our girls that a boy’s physical strength doesn’t give him the right to be in power over her or make demands of her. We teach our girls to look to the characteristics God values in boys rather than the characteristics culture values in boys.


Kids who experience gender incongruence…
Show empathy. Recognize that they did not choose to experience gender incongruence
Help your child resolve what distress they can (mitigation strategies that do not include social or medical transition) and manage what remains.
Encourage your teen to delay embracing a concrete trans identity

[Notes]
Some of the kids in our homes, some of the teens in our churches are going to experience gender incongruence, perhaps because they feel deeply that they were born in the wrong body or maybe because they don’t quite fit in with current cultural gender norms. Some youth may even take on a trans identity as a way to find community, even if they don’t experience a robust sense that their sex and gender don’t align.
even if you think their experience of gender incongruence is mild or a phase. Show compassion and care for them well. Dismissing their experience can bring on pain and even more confusion, and dismissal can result in greater mental health challenges. Plus, your relationship with the child could be damaged. Have open and honest conversations about gender incongruence. 

1: Avoid forced choice moments: Don’t force a female child to choose between her family and her preference to wear androgynous clothing; don’t force a male teen to choose between God and wearing his hair long and painting his fingernails.
ensure their mental health is cared for (mental health must be addressed before any decisions can be made about names, pronouns, etc; connect your child with a therapist), talk about whether cultural gender norms or stereotypes they may feel expected to uphold are actually biblical, and help them find and keep solid friendships/community/family.

2: Even some on the radical left have discouraged allowing children to transition due to the short-term and long-term health risks related to puberty blockers and hormonal drug treatments. Health risks for puberty blockers include student height, diminished bone density, headaches, hot flashes, weight gain, mood and emotion alterations, negative effects on memory and concentration, negative effects on self-control and mental flexibility, negative effect on IQ level, and stunted genitalia. The health risks associated with cross-sex hormone therapy include adverse changes in blood pressure and cholesterol, increased risk of heart attack and stroke, increased risk of blood clots, increased risk of cancer, irreversible changes (like a lower voice for biological females), increased risk of infertility. Ultimately, a teen navigating gender incongruence is likely dealing with co-occurring medical and/or mental health concerns. Are they truly in a place to make risky medical decisions that will likely have negative and irreversible consequences? Instead of considering medical intervention, especially in the beginning and for teens, get help for mental health concerns, offer teens places where they can make sense of their distress and find belonging, and avoid excessive social media and internet usage. Socially/medically transitioning as a child or teen and then de-transitioning after puberty will only add to the distress felt. 

3: Not because you doubt your child’s undeniable experience, but because some teens have great difficulty explaining their discomfort/disorientation in puberty and reach out for something to explain and alleviate those feelings. Encouraging identity could enable your child to label the source of their discomfort/disorientation as gender incongruence when they’re not actually experiencing robust feelings of disconnection or distress when it comes to their gender and biological sex, which means that the true source of their distress is masked and goes unaddressed.
Other practical mitigation strategies will be discussed later in this training.

ROGD (Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria)
No trans adolescents were surveyed 
The websites where the surveys were posted were used by parents who openly objected to their child’s transgender identity 
The onset of GD may have seemed rapid from the parents’ perspective 
Conservative parents, political leaders, and church leaders have latched onto this term

[Notes]
In 2016, a professor at Brown University wondered whether social contagion and peer pressure might be the cause for the rising number of teens taking on transgender identities despite no prior observable history of gender dysphoria or incongruence. She posted an online survey on three websites for parents who believed their child had developed symptoms of gender dysphoria and began identifying as transgender simultaneously with other kids in their peer groups. Based on the results of the survey, the professor published a study in 2018 speculating that the rapid onset of gender dysphoria was a “social coping mechanism,” and the term Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria (ROGD) was born. Controversy ensued as criticism of the study’s methodology and conclusions were voiced by clinicians, trans* activists, and researchers who pointed out that no trans adolescents were surveyed, the websites where the surveys were posted were used by parents who openly objected to their child’s transgender identity, and the onset of GD may have seemed rapid from the parents’ perspective only because the adolescents experiencing GD chose not to tell them earlier. Unfortunately, conservative parents, political leaders, and church leaders have latched onto this term and used it to blame the media, LGBTQ+ culture, technology, etc for the growing number of youth identifying as trans or seeking out social/medical transition which has led to a wholesale dismissal of the genuine distress and pain that gender incongruence causes. Those concerned about the study and its impact worry about the damage it has done to those who genuinely experience gender incongruence at a young age. In short, there’s not enough evidence to support ROGD as a genuine trans experience.
Still there seems to be something to this phenomena: teens, particularly biological girls, who have shown no signs of gender incongruence or dysphoria are suddenly identifying as transgender in increasing numbers. They often have several friends who identify as trans and are often more accepted socially after identifying as trans themselves. These teens tend to have in common heavy engagement in social media and refusal to address other mental health concerns (63% "had one or more diagnoses of a psychiatric disorder or neurodevelopmental disability preceding their onset") (Embodied, 163). They seem to be experiencing high levels of distress from several sources and are seeking a solution to and a way to explain their pain. Thus, they believe that transition will resolve their distress and lead to more social acceptance and belonging (Embodied, 166-7). Unfortunately, less than a third of transition clinicians choose to "explore issues of mental health, previous trauma, or any alternative causes of gender dysphoria before proceeding" with puberty blockers or cross-sex hormones for teens who present with sudden trans identification (Embodied, 164).
Recognize instead that kids and teens are vulnerable to a wide variety of outside influence. Strive to have age-appropriate conversations about gender, sexuality, and mental health all throughout childhood. Instead of trying to convince your child that they’re not really experiencing gender incongruence or dysphoria, follow the advice I shared earlier and the practical advice we’ll get to in a bit.


ROGD (Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria)
Teens, particularly biological girls, who have shown no signs of gender incongruence or dysphoria are suddenly identifying as transgender in increasing numbers

Less than a third of transition clinicians choose to explore alternative causes of gender dysphoria before proceeding with puberty blockers or cross-sex hormones.

[Notes]
Still there seems to be something to this phenomena: teens, particularly biological girls, who have shown no signs of gender incongruence or dysphoria are suddenly identifying as transgender in increasing numbers. They often have several friends who identify as trans and are often more accepted socially after identifying as trans themselves. These teens tend to have in common heavy engagement in social media and refusal to address other mental health concerns (63% "had one or more diagnoses of a psychiatric disorder or neurodevelopmental disability preceding their onset"). They seem to be experiencing high levels of distress from several sources and are seeking a solution to and a way to explain their pain. Thus, they believe that transition will resolve their distress and lead to more social acceptance and belonging. Unfortunately, less than a third of transition clinicians choose to "explore issues of mental health, previous trauma, or any alternative causes of gender dysphoria before proceeding" with puberty blockers or cross-sex hormones for teens who present with sudden trans identification.
Recognize instead that kids and teens are vulnerable to a wide variety of outside influence. Strive to have age-appropriate conversations about gender, sexuality, and mental health all throughout childhood. Instead of trying to convince your child that they’re not really experiencing gender incongruence or dysphoria, follow the advice I shared earlier and the practical advice we’ll get to in a bit.
 Policies for bathrooms, sleeping arrangements, leader presentation
Approach marriage wisely
Public presentation of Visitors/Members/Leaders
Bathrooms
Sleeping Spaces on Teen Trips

[Notes]
While compassionate and biblical pastoral care should be a church’s first priority, detailing policies are eventually necessary. Some might prefer to address practical questions about bathrooms, overnight camps, the public presentation of leaders, etc. on a case-by-case basis, but that strategy is more likely to lead to painfully-inconsistent application. Instead, churches can do their best to anticipate practical realities and describe policies that balance love and wisdom, while humbly recognizing that the exact placement of boundaries may be imperfect. Gender minorities prefer clarity that reduces anxiety, even when they disagree with the ultimate placement of those boundaries. Below are suggestions for policies at your church, but these suggestions are by no means definitive:
Approach marriage wisely
Christians navigating gender incongruence are not necessarily ineligible for marriage, but are encouraged to disclose their experience and any related challenges to a spouse. For churches convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic, the Church has historically taught the sexual difference between husband and wife is a key aspect of God’s design for Christian marriage. While gender complementarity was also assumed, biological sexual difference and the complementarity between God’s intentions for the partners’ sex/gender has consistently been stressed. Therefore, even when gender incongruence persists, two Christians of the opposite sex satisfy the need for sexual difference in Christian marriage.
Public presentation of Visitors/Members/Leaders
If a church defines rules for gender expression, it is important that that church be able to defend those rules and apply those justifications consistently across all populations. Remember that most standards for public presentation are culturally-created, not instituted by God for all people in all places in all times. And remember the ways that gender overprescription have exacerbated or created gender incongruence in faithful believers. Churches may call leaders to more narrow gender expression, allowing for more diverse gender expression at the level of membership but asking leaders to conform to more traditional gender expression for the sake of those they lead. At the same time, calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations that are not morally necessary may communicate to membership an unspoken message that they must conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved, creating a barrier to the gospel and discipleship under the Lordship of Jesus.
Bathrooms
Most trans people prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms. If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom. To avoid controversy, you can label it as a “family” bathroom and privately communicate to trans people that it’s an all-gender single-occupancy bathroom available to them. Many trans people will avoid using the bathroom at church if no single-occupancy bathrooms are available. Finally, if you notice that someone is using a bathroom different than their biological sex, start with having respectful conversation to learn about their reasons for choosing to use a different bathroom. Often, trans people will share about painful or scary experiences in bathrooms associated with their biological sex. With a deeper appreciation of their experience, you may find additional motivation to invest in creative solutions.
Sleeping Spaces on Teen Trips
Most trans people don't want to sleep in a space with people of the opposite sex (or the same sex). More often than not, they prefer privacy away from both people of the same sex and people of the opposite sex. If possible, avoid same-sex sleeping arrangements. This will also accommodate gay teens, teens struggling with body shame, or teens who are uncomfortable undressing around other people for a variety of reasons. When shared sleeping areas cannot be avoided, modesty rules may reduce anxiety for a range of teens. In addition, a trans student could stay in a private room close to shared sleeping areas, stay with leaders, or offer for the student to commute. Different teens will prefer different solutions. The key is to communicate with the teen about what solutions make them comfortable so they can focus on the much more important intention of the trip: enjoying Christian fellowship and deepening their relationship with Christ. It’s important to note that if you offer for a trans teen to stay in a shared sleeping place with teens of the opposite sex, you would do well to inform students and parents appropriately as to avoid controversy of withholding that information only for it to be discovered later.


CASE STUDIES

[Notes]
When ministering to transgender people, pastors and parents should consider to what extent the individual is Christian, the depth of relationship the mentor has with the transgender person, and to what extent the individual has agreed to submit to the authority of his or her church. From this place of awareness, pastors and parents will know what next best step the transgender Christian can take in submitting to God and whether the mentor has the relationship with the transgender Christian to guide them accordingly.


65
CASE STUDIES
10-year-old female child who 
Identifies as a Christian 
Has attended your church since birth 
Dresses in boy’s clothes 
Exhibits tomboy preferences 
Has started wondering if she was really supposed to be a boy
Wants to be called by a different name and pronouns

[Notes]
For example, consider a 10-year-old female child who identifies as a Christian, has attended your church since birth, dresses in boy’s clothes, exhibits tomboy preferences, has started wondering if she was really supposed to be a boy, and wants to be called by a different name and pronouns. Pastors and parents should not shame the child for her questions or exploration of a different name and pronouns. They can have nuanced conversations about the brokenness of sex and gender and how we can honor God in the midst of that brokenness. During this process, pastors and parents may invite or even instruct the child to continue to use her given name and pronouns.

66
CASE STUDIES
40-year-old self-identified woman who 
Is spiritually curious but not a Christian 
Was born a man, now goes by a woman’s name and pronouns 
Uses the women’s bathroom 
Presents as a woman 
Appears to have undergone breast augmentation

[Notes]
Now, instead, consider a 40-year-old self-identified woman who is spiritually curious but not a Christian, was born a man, now goes by a woman’s name and pronouns, uses the women’s bathroom, presents as a woman, and appears to have undergone breast augmentation. Long before any discussion about what bathroom the individual should use at your church, what name and pronoun she should use, or whether to undo her surgery, years or decades may be spent developing a relationship with the individual and walking alongside her as she develops a relationship with Christ.

67
CASE STUDIES
1. A Christian who transitioned and has received nothing but positive affirmation from godly people in their life.

2. A Christian who was on the brink of committing suicide (maybe had several attempts) and has been told by religious authorities that transitioning is their only hope.

[Notes]
There are often many complex and varied ways that trans* people have and will continue to interact with the church. Based on what we have discussed so far, How would you respond to people in these situations? 

1: Have open, honest dialogue about what this decision means for them and the ways it does/does not honor God. 
2: Address mental health issues and circumstances contributing to these issues first while seeking out gradual steps to mitigate dysphoria. 
3: Have open, honest dialogue about what it looks like to remain in community and what it looks like for their church community to continue to walk alongside them. 
4: Have open, honest dialogue about the root of this unloving spirit within leadership/the church and then seek out any ways to reconnect with the individual, make amends, and pursue an ongoing conversation about community, discipleship, and faith in connection to their incongruence.
5: Have open, honest dialogue about what it means to reconcile their gender with their faith and how the church can walk well alongside them as they discern through prayer and community what this process looks like in their life. 
6: Focus on loving them as a person and helping them understand the Gospel. Be honest with any questions they may have in regard to their gender presentation and faith as well as any other questions they may have about following Jesus.
7: Focus on the basics of discipleship and spiritual growth. Prayerfully discern with them what it looks like to reconcile their faith and gender and how to honor God faithfully in their life.
8: Help provide them with good resources and support during this de-transition period. Address any concerns about perceived differences and help ease them into areas of community that may be challenging for them. 




68
CASE STUDIES
3. A Christian who has decided not to follow gracious, wise counsel backed by theological and scientific evidence that transitioning was not a morally right thing to do. This counsel was coupled with sacrificial, loving fellowship and a commitment to walk with the person through alternative ways of dealing with their dysphoria.

4. A Christian who has decided not to follow religious counsel that was very impersonal, trite, and uninformed. This counsel was not offered alongside any relational commitment, love, or guidance.

[Notes]
There are often many complex and varied ways that trans* people have and will continue to interact with the church. Based on what we have discussed so far, How would you respond to people in these situations? 

1: Have open, honest dialogue about what this decision means for them and the ways it does/does not honor God. 
2: Address mental health issues and circumstances contributing to these issues first while seeking out gradual steps to mitigate dysphoria. 
3: Have open, honest dialogue about what it looks like to remain in community and what it looks like for their church community to continue to walk alongside them. 
4: Have open, honest dialogue about the root of this unloving spirit within leadership/the church and then seek out any ways to reconnect with the individual, make amends, and pursue an ongoing conversation about community, discipleship, and faith in connection to their incongruence.
5: Have open, honest dialogue about what it means to reconcile their gender with their faith and how the church can walk well alongside them as they discern through prayer and community what this process looks like in their life. 
6: Focus on loving them as a person and helping them understand the Gospel. Be honest with any questions they may have in regard to their gender presentation and faith as well as any other questions they may have about following Jesus.
7: Focus on the basics of discipleship and spiritual growth. Prayerfully discern with them what it looks like to reconcile their faith and gender and how to honor God faithfully in their life.
8: Help provide them with good resources and support during this de-transition period. Address any concerns about perceived differences and help ease them into areas of community that may be challenging for them. 




69
CASE STUDIES
5. A Christian who transitioned before they came to Christ.

6. A non-Christian who's been coming to your church and is spiritually seeking.

7. A brand-new convert to Christianity.

8. A person (Christian or non-Christian) who has transitioned but now might want to de-transition.

[Notes]
There are often many complex and varied ways that trans* people have and will continue to interact with the church. Based on what we have discussed so far, How would you respond to people in these situations? 

1: Have open, honest dialogue about what this decision means for them and the ways it does/does not honor God. 
2: Address mental health issues and circumstances contributing to these issues first while seeking out gradual steps to mitigate dysphoria. 
3: Have open, honest dialogue about what it looks like to remain in community and what it looks like for their church community to continue to walk alongside them. 
4: Have open, honest dialogue about the root of this unloving spirit within leadership/the church and then seek out any ways to reconnect with the individual, make amends, and pursue an ongoing conversation about community, discipleship, and faith in connection to their incongruence.
5: Have open, honest dialogue about what it means to reconcile their gender with their faith and how the church can walk well alongside them as they discern through prayer and community what this process looks like in their life. 
6: Focus on loving them as a person and helping them understand the Gospel. Be honest with any questions they may have in regard to their gender presentation and faith as well as any other questions they may have about following Jesus.
7: Focus on the basics of discipleship and spiritual growth. Prayerfully discern with them what it looks like to reconcile their faith and gender and how to honor God faithfully in their life.
8: Help provide them with good resources and support during this de-transition period. Address any concerns about perceived differences and help ease them into areas of community that may be challenging for them. 




70
CASE STUDIES
Attitudes toward transitioning among Christians navigating gender incongruence vary. Anecdotally, I have friends who…
Have already transitioned socially and/or medically
Are currently in process of transitioning socially or medically
Want to transition socially and/or medically in the future
Plan not to transition
What role has your faith played in processing your gender?
“I've grown in my appreciation for God's diversity in his creation. I've definitely thought a lot more about the creation narrative and how God's plans include places in the middle.”
“It's been very encouraging to see how Christ biblically invited in those traditionally excluded by society, and I haven't yet seen any persuasive biblical arguments to not transition, so I don't see any conflict between my faith and my transition.”
What role has your faith played in processing your gender?
“I was unable to move forward in processing my Gender until I felt confident that God would still love me. My faith did, and still does, come first. In being able to see God has accepting and loving gender-expansiveness, it's given me the freedom to explore my own.”
What role has the Church played in processing your gender?
“My church has been really great in affirming my name (we have a rite of renaming in our service books). It would have been nice to have more places to discuss what masculinity means to me.”
What role has the Church played in processing your gender?
“It has not been a safe place. It was an obstacle and being able to accept myself. I had to leave the church I grew up in for many reasons, including it being unsafe for Gender expansive individuals. I fear backlash and anger from many of my former church family if I were to fully come out on all social media platforms.”

“Almost none. It’s been a source of anxiety”
How has the Church supported you in processing your gender?
Each shared about a lack of support from their church.
How has the Church failed to support you or hindered you in processing your gender?
“I go to a more liberal church where it was very natural for them to support me when I started to transition. I would have appreciated being in an environment where people asked me more questions.”

“The church as an structured institution has not given me space to explore outside the cishet box they see as safe. The global Church I found in online community was essential in helping me come out to myself and still feel loved and wanted by others and by God.”
How has the Church failed to support you or hindered you in processing your gender?
“The institutional church has almost never felt like a space where I could ask questions and have space to process them, or where I could be open about my thoughts and feelings without receiving suspicion.”
What is something that still provides you with hope?
“I know that I'm not alone in my community, and that is something that leaves me feeling very hopeful.”

“Jesus' radical acceptance of all who put their faith in Him, regardless of and sometimes in spite of your status in society. I KNOW He loves me, as I was and as I will be. I hope to one day be a friendly, approachable, and nonthreatening face of transition to the church, demonstrating that we're not evil or dangerous, we're just people.”
What is something that still provides you with hope?
“That one day God will reveal His Truth. And that whether or not my interpretation of scripture is correct or not, the blood of Christ covers any misunderstanding or misreading. Whether I be wrong or right, I can rest in Christ's forgiveness.”

“Individual Christians who learn and listen. I have great hope in my faith in that Jesus knows our experiences, will never leave us, and ultimately even if I am unknowingly wrong in my choices, he offers me restoration.”
