


CARING FOR

FAMILIES




[Notes]
SOME KIND OF INTRO





Amber Carroll of

[Notes]
introduction: why does Amber have credibility?
personal story, years + role at EQUIP, Parent Course, experience as parent and teacher

I’m Amber Carroll and I am EQUIP’s Parent Content Specialist.  I developed and recently released EQUIP’s Parent Course, a 5-week intensive designed to equip parents of young kids with a deep familiarity with God’s good plans for sexual stewardship and provide practical, age-appropriate guides for conversation about sexual stewardship and culture.
In addition to my work with EQUIP, I devote many hours each week to my most demanding job: parenting.  My daughter, Blaise, is 7, and my son, Ransom, is 5.
The work of EQUIP is important to me for two reasons.
1. My children.  If one of my children happens to be gay, I don’t want shame and hiding and fear for them.  I want them to grow up hearing that God loves them deeply and has good things in store for them.  That Jesus is worth any sacrifices they must make to follow Him.  I want them to be loved, supported, drawn into deep and committed family relationships, and discipled well in their church. And I believe EQUIP helps churches become places where this is possible.
2. My ex-husband. I was married for almost 8 years to a gay man who believed that marrying a woman was what he had to do to be acceptable to the church and to God.  Due, in part, to the church’s lack of support for him and for us, he left me six years ago and has since turned away from anything having to do with God or church.  I want to be part of offering a solution to churches so that other gay people don’t feel the need to leave the church to find family and belonging.




Clarification
Labels and term-mirroring
Focus on serving sexual minorities




[Notes]
terminology + term mirroring
not gonna talk about trans stuff (and why)



What is EQUIP?
A team of missionary consults helping churches become places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic




[Notes]
How do we do this? Long-term partnerships with churches to help them identify ways they could grow in becoming a place of thriving, cast a vision for thriving 5-10 years from now, lay out a careful strategy for realizing that vision, and partner to provide all of the teaching, training, coaching, and consulting needed to get your church there



Our Results
210 trainings at 55 churches, Christian universities, & campus Ministries
7500 Christian Leaders for 16,000 total training hours
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective






Why no thriving?



Most churches…
Inconsistently apply the Bible’s wisdom about sexual stewardship
Avoid talking about sexuality clearly
Enable gay teens to process alone
Outsource care of gay people
Provide little support for celibate people or mixed-orientation marriages




[Notes]
First, most churches inconsistently apply the Bible’s wisdom about sexual stewardship. Most churches today lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married, teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce. This leads to high divorce rates and a void of theology and practice of vocational singleness among straight Christians. But then we call same-sex attracted Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship by allowing straight Christians to misuse marriage for their romantic fulfillment while asking only same-sex attracted Christians to consider vocational singleness. This is hypocritical, and churches lose any credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom.

Second, most churches today avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people, so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends. As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story. Churches that sit the fence on this topic hurt same-sex attracted Christians because their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Third, most churches wait until a kid shares that he is gay to address the topic of homosexuality. This is a problem. On average, teens wait five years after first recognizing their same-sex attraction to talk to a parent or pastor. That’s five years that a teen makes sense of these questions alone. Most often, this means that a teen has either developed shame, depression, and suicidality or adopted a progressive sexual ethic (and often both).
 
Fourth, unfortunately, many parents and pastors first react to a teen sharing about his attractions by sending him to a therapist or a parachurch ministry outside of the church to “fix” him. Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to same-sex attracted people well, so they outsource the care. The shame and loneliness of same-sex attracted people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment. They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.
 
Fifth, a lot of churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics, but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable. They are places where no one is thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex. In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage, the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for same-sex attracted people. But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well, and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness. It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?



Vision for Thriving



Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
First, our churches need to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship. We need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness during which we discern whether we are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness or a lifetime vocation of Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. Our churches should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
 
Second, our churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality. With compassion and theological accuracy, they explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do LGBT+ people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to LGBT+ people good?
As a result, everyone in your church knows how to love LGBT+ people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality. Plus, same-sex attracted people in your church still in the closet will know what you believe, your love for them, and that it is safe to share their story.
 
Third, our churches need to talk about the possibility of same-sex attraction in age-appropriate ways across the lifespan. Before a teen realizes he or she experiences same-sex attraction, the teen hears that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to, that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less, and that God has good and beautiful plans for them. Then, when teens realize their same-sex attractions, they quickly share with their parents and pastors, inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways.
 
Fourth, our churches must provide effective pastoral care to same-sex attracted Christians. They've done what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to same-sex attracted people. While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression, these churches recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured. Parents and pastors help same-sex attracted people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.
 
Fifth, our churches need to become places where same-sex attracted people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort. 

That’s what we’re here to talk about today.

These churches teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture, adults are modeling thriving in vocational singleness and they are celebrated in the church, and the church invites all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage. Most importantly, these churches are places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find, whether that be through intentional Christian communities of celibate (or celibate and married) people or helping celibates move in with marrieds to be a part of their family. Then, these churches teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for same-sex attracted people, cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.



BELIEFS


[Notes]
What does EQUIP believe? What do we think pastors and parents should be teaching kids about God-honoring sexual stewardship, and in particular, LGBT+ topics?
(for now just being transparent about our beliefs, will get into the why later)



What do we believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different

[Notes]
We believe that experiencing same-sex attraction, people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay, is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So we don’t think that when God first imagined any of us and projected us being born into a perfect world, that God planned for us to experience same-sex attraction
But because we are born into a broken world, one of the ways some are affected by that brokenness is that they gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attraction
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name or by participating in gay cultural in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the left argues that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And the person on the right argues that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions.
What do we believe?

[Notes]
We also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond
The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask: If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So if order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
We believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others






God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.
What do we believe?

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as we understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to vocational singleness—to give up the prospect of romance, dating, sex, marriage, and children to do kingdom work parents don’t have the time or energy to do--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

Another way to clearly communicate what we believe is to contrast it with extremes on both sides. An organization called the Gay Christian Network popularized the terms Side A, Side B, and Side X to refer to three different theological camps in this conversation



Side A



God makes people gay
God blesses same-sex marriages in the same ways that He blesses opposite-sex marriages
Requires theological maneuvering or a belief that the Bible is not binding/prescriptive for a modern context 



Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All people are called to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways




Side X



Same-sex attracted Christians must reject their attractions and work toward change
Continuing to experience SSA is a sign of willful disobedience
Homosexuality is sinful
God intends for all people to marry someone of the opposite sex

[Notes]

But why are we at EQUIP convinced of this? And how can pastors and parents convincingly teach God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship




WHY & HOW?


[Notes]
What does EQUIP believe? What do we think pastors and parents should be teaching kids about God-honoring sexual stewardship, and in particular, LGBT+ topics?
(for now just being transparent about our beliefs, will get into the why later)






Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work with greater focus (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women with openness to raising children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or
Why do we believe?

[Notes]
Most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin. They are often called “the clobber passages”. I’m not going to get into those. I think they can be used as meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are. 
 
For us, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives. God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness. When it comes to what we do with our capacity for romance and sex and our need for relationship and community, God seems to be pretty clear that there are two options for Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. 
 
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those options. They praised both and described both as having a specific design. In passages such as Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed vocational singleness where one gives up romance, marriage, and sex to do kingdom work with undivided attention. In Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul, respectively, spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman with an openness to raising children.

The Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
Instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
 God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex






But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
Less commitment and more infidelity
My gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith
My own story of pain
Why do we believe?

[Notes]
Even if we weren’t convinced logically of a biblical sexual ethic, I couldn’t ignore the experiential evidence out there

At a 30,000 foot level, the average adult same-sex partnership lasts much shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
And the rates of adultery and infidelity are much higher in same-sex marriages
Now we can argue whether this is the result of societal oppression, the bad fruit of not following God’s design, or both

At first, these friends performed impressive theological acrobatics to read Scripture to say that God fully blesses same-sex marriages. But eventually, most of these friends admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve consistently understood it to say for 2000 years. These friends were convinced that God fully blesses same-sex marriages, but concluded that the Bible is not binding or authoritative for modern people. Yet once they concluded that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is, they realize they were just worshiping a God they came up with.
 
Let me be clear: I want all of my friends to have robust relationships with God. It pains me to see this consistent pattern. But the fruit of a progressive sexual ethic that I see in the lives of my gay friends is them losing their faith.







Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

The Church MUST do better.
Why do we believe?

[Notes]
But, admittedly, there’s also bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a biblical sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do
But I’m convinced this isn’t because a traditional sexual ethic is false
Or because these gay Christians aren’t trying hard enough
No, it’s because churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like them

I think that’s the double burden of Christians who are gay: churches don’t know how to love them well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for them either
That sucks
That horribly unfair and unjust
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for people good for people
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God
why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for all of us and obey His teachings
 
So I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a traditional sexual ethic, because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
The solution is for our churches to teach and embody God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people in a way that leads to thriving in the lives of gay people
Let’s get into that: what does it sound like to teach how God has invited every Christian to steward their sexualities?



SEXUAL STEWARDSHIP




Intimacy & Family



God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.

God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.

[Notes]
God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family. How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.
 
God put Himself in families. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a family called the Trinity. And the Trinity created this world, made man, gave us choice, and sent His son to live a perfect life and die on the cross for our sins so that we could be a part of His family. The Bible goes even further to establish that God is in family and He invites us into that family by calling us, the group of people who follow Jesus, Christ’s bride and calling Jesus our groom. We’re being married into the family of God.

(SKIP) In John 3:29, John the Baptist meets Jesus for the first time and describes himself as a guest at a wedding where Jesus is the groom and the people of God are his bride. In Ephesians 5 Paul uses an analogy of a husband and wife to teach Christ-followers to submit to God and to celebrate that we are Christ’s bride. Finally, in Revelation 19:6-9, the Apostle John describes a wedding feast at the end of time when Christ returns triumphantly to celebrate being united with his bride, the Church—that’s us!



Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
But God isn’t just a being in a family. The love enjoyed in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church is a particular kind of love. Historically, Christians have characterized that love in six ways: God’s love is complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable:

First, God’s love is complementary or diverse. There is a different-ness between the persons of the Trinity—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. And there is complementarity between Christ and his bride, the Church.

(SKIP) In Revelations 7:9, the Apostle John describes a celebration of the diversity of God’s people: “After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne…”
 
Second, God’s love is intimate. The persons of the Trinity know each other perfectly and are fully known by each other.

(SKIP) In John 17:20, Jesus speaks longingly about the Trinity when praying for his disciples: “‘My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they...be one as we are one—I in them and you in me—so that they may be brought to complete unity. Then the world will know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.’” God the Father reciprocates this affection. Just after Jesus is baptized, the following happens in Matthew 3:16-17” “...At that moment heaven was opened, and [Jesus] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.’”
 
Plus, Christ intimately knows and loves His people and wants them to seek out relationship with Him.

(SKIP)  1 John 4: 7, 8, and 19 say, “Dear friends, let us love one another, for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love. We love because he first loved us.” We can only love because God Himself is love, made us to be creatures who love, and loved us first.
 
Third, God’s love is procreative or life-giving. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit made the world, filled it with animals, and made us humans, together. The Trinity gave us life. And then God became man and Jesus lived and died for us so that we could have life.

In John 10:10 Jesus says, “I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full.” Without Jesus we are dead people walking. We have sinned against God, and we do not deserve to join Him in heaven. But Jesus paid the price for our sins so that we could have eternal life.
 
Fourth, the love of God is faithful or permanent. There is a perfect and permanent faithfulness in the Trinity and from Christ to His people. No matter what we do, God will never abandon us or withhold his love.

(SKIP) Lamentations 3:22-23 says it this way: “The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases; His mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is [God’s] faithfulness.”
 
Fifth, the love of God is sacrificial. As we’ve already mentioned, Jesus offered himself up as a perfect sacrifice so that all of God’s children could return to Him. 

(SKIP) Paul describes Christ’s sacrifice in this way in Romans 5:6 and 8: “You see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly... But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.”
 
And finally, the love of God is hospitable. Ultimately, the work of creating this world and humans to fill it was an invitation into God’s family. And then God extended His arms of invitation again by dying on the cross so we could be reunited with Him.




Intimacy & Family



We are created in God’s image for that kind of love with God and each other

Sexuality – our need for relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive that kind of love

[Notes]
Because we are created in God’s image, we are made for that kind of love with God and each other
we are all made for complementary, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality

our sexuality is our need for those things
our need to be in relationship
to know and be known
to give and receive love
and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on cognitive, physical, and spiritual levels



Intimacy & Family



We are all created for intimacy in the context of family.

Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

[Notes]
Plus, we are all created to enjoy this within the context of family. But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids. In Matthew 12:46-50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family, rejecting familial ties based solely on biology and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ:
 
“While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him. Someone told him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.’ But to the one who had told him this, Jesus replied, ‘Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?’ And pointing to his disciples, he said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers! For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’”
 
Jesus defines Christian family as a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other. From the beginning, families made up of God’s children were intended to imitate the love within the Trinity and between God and His people: to bear the image of that love. The love found in families was intended to be intimate, faithful, sacrificial, diverse, live-giving, and hospitable, embodying God’s love in beautiful ways.



Intimacy & Family



Neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs.

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime.

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.


[Notes]
3 caveats:

neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meeting our intimacy needs

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime. Isaiah 59:2 says that our sins, our imperfection, our unwise choices have separated us from God and each other. Because this world is broken and we are broken, we can only ever connect with God and each other imperfectly. There’s this distance because of brokenness that we can never cross. Some amount of loneliness is a part of life. It is unavoidable.
 
So should we just give up and stop trying to connect in healthy ways? No! For starters, even if we can’t meet all of our needs fully and finally, we can still get a lot of what we need. We can still enjoy rich, satisfying intimacy with God and other people in this life. And second, if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.




Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
So God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.
And the love we enjoy in that family should point us back to the love in God’s family, should serve as an image of God’s love, should embody the gospel by being complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable

So what does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?
Well, God has given us two specific ways to do that, he has designed two vocations for stewarding our sexualities in ways that honor Him and point us back to Him: vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Both of these vocations embody those 6 characteristics of the love in God’s family
Both vocations are calls to intimacy in the context of human family

Why do I say vocation? Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children

The practice of vocational singleness and Christian marriage in our churches should be so beautiful that those who do not yet know Jesus want to draw close to them and get to know the Source of that love
When non-believers step into the homes of Christian marriages or vocational singles living together as a family, the love found there should help people believe that God loves them
And they should experience God’s love through those families

That’s why it’s so important for our churches to be places where people are thriving in Christian marriage and vocational singleness—because the gospel depends on it
And that’s why we have to teach accurately about these



Sexual Stewardship



All first called to a period of temporary singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to a vocation of Christian marriage
Others called to a vocation of singleness for the kingdom

[Notes]
So, how does a Christian know which of these vocations they are called to?
What’s God’s design for each of these vocations?
How do we do them well?

Here’s a summary of what I understand to be Christian orthodoxy for how God invites us to steward our sexualities



Sexual Stewardship




[Notes]
Here’s a representation of those same idea in a diagram
As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of languishing in temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

Remember, I’ll tease out all of these claims in the slides to come



Share



How different is this diagram of sexual stewardship from what you learned growing up?

How might seeing oneself called to temporary singleness and assuming neither marriage nor vocational singleness be beneficial?
31

[Notes]
SL



Temporary Singleness



A period of temporary singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong vocational singleness nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others

[Notes]
What are we first called to?

We are all first called to a temporary period of abstinent singleness in which we enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ in non-sexual, non-romantic companionship.
We should all learn to do this well
This is a calling to neither vocational singleness nor marriage—defining our default calling in the negative is not sufficient but it is informative—we are not yet called to vocational singleness or to marriage. 
We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires, want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 
We should all submit our sexuality to God, study what the Scriptures have to say about sexual stewardship, and discern with God and spiritual mentors in our lives whether we are called to vocational singleness or marriage.

As I mentioned earlier, the Church has consistently taught that it is NOT God’s intention for Christians to continue in temporary for a lifetime
For the vast majority, it is better to settle down into vocational singleness or marriage
But there are always exceptions to the rule
There will be people whom God calls to leave open the possibility of vocational singleness or marriage in there 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps even their entire life
Our churches need to honor and support all those who are faithfully following God’s call







Why should everyone discern?
Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen


Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
I mentioned that everyone should discern this questions of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
That we should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference
Why?

God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires







A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness. 
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
now a single person might push back
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally natural
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should all discern which God has called us to








5 Ingredients for Wise Discernment
Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
so what does it look like to ask God this question
to give God a chance
to discern?

Here’s 5 suggestions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.






Share



What hesitations do you have to inviting every Christian to discern between vocational singleness and marriage?

What are other helpful ingredients for wise discernment?


31

[Notes]
SL






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
We’ve already established that God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
At this point, I think it’d be helpful to make a distinction between temporary singleness and the vocational singleness I’m talking about here
we are all born into temporary singleness
that’s our default state
and then some of us are called to Christian marriage
and others of us are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
 
why is it important to make that distinction?
because there’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage versus accepting a call to permanently give up the prospect of romance, sex, marriage, or children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work parents can’t
My friends in temporary singleness seem to be only shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and the kingdom work they’re doing, because they need to always be prepared to reorganize their lives around a future marriage
and the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
they’re commending vocational singleness
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness
so I want to particularly focus on vocational singleness, because that’s the one we don’t hear much about in church
Plus, even if you’re only single temporarily, I think there are ways you can borrow from vocational singleness, even if only for a time






“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth 
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE
Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.
But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.
Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy






Diverse – differentness of personalities, sexes, ages
Intimate – still a call to family, fullness of God’s love in NHNE
Faithful – permanent and lifetime, consistent kingdom work
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now, let’s look at the ways singleness for the sake of the kingdom embodies those six characteristics of love found in the Trinity and between Christ and His Church.


1. Vocational singleness is diverse. The friendships enjoyed by those committed to vocational singleness reflect the diversity in God’s family. There is a differentness between the persons in each friendship. Plus, vocational singles still need healthy relationships with people of the opposite sex, parents, and children. Vocational singleness is still a call to a diversity of friendships with people of all ages and stages of life. This differentness points observers back to the complementarity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church as well as the unity found in the body of Christ even amidst differences.

2. Vocational singleness is intimate. As already mentioned, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of family. Jesus and Paul recognize vocational singles’ need for committed companionship and promise a 100-fold of family in this lifetime (reference). This intimacy points observers back to the intimacy in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. The family vocational singles enjoy testifies to the fullness of God’s love and gives every Christian hope for how we will all live in the New Heavens and New Earth.

3. Vocational singleness is faithful. The permanent, lifetime nature of a commitment to vocational singleness reflects the faithfulness of God’s love found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. Through this vocation, those called faithfully live out their singleness for the Lord consistently build up the kingdom in ways that point back to the faithfulness of the love in God’s family.







Life-giving – spiritually procreative and more kingdom work
Sacrificial – give up idol of romance to follow Jesus
Hospitable – offer family to lonely
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
4. Vocational singleness is life-giving. While those called to vocational singleness do not bear biological children, their availability for kingdom works should bear the fruit of many times more spiritual children. The vocationally single have the time and energy to share the gospel with more not-yet-believers and mentor more new Christians than parents can. Plus, those called to vocational singleness reflect the procreative nature of God’s love by building up the kingdom and bringing spiritual life to the Church.

5. Vocational singleness is sacrificial. At first glance, those called to vocational singleness have chosen to give up their right to some of our culture’s most coveted experiences: romance, dating, marriage, and sex. The sacrifice of vocational singles points observers back to the sacrificial nature of the love in God’s family.

6. Vocational singleness is hospitable. Those called to vocational singleness have the unique opportunity to offer family to those on the margins without the need to compete for belonging. This hospitality reflects the welcoming nature of the love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.



Share



Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

How is this teaching different than how you were taught to think about the singleness discussed in Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7?
55

[Notes]





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage…
Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage

Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…
Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.
In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce, giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention. Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence, but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception, and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception. Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce. Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine (1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman…
God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman
God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage. In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman. In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband. Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.
God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)

For those who are called to marriage, they should recognize that marriage will be one of the most difficult things they do








How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
How does Christian marriage specifically embody the gospel and reflect the Trinity and God’s relationship with the Church?

complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically
intimate - sexually, emotionally, and spiritually






How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences
Hospitable – opening one’s home up to those outside of the nuclear family
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
procreative - raise children
faithful - lifetime
sacrificial - in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer
hospitable - invite others into home

those called to marriage will thrive when they seek to fulfill these purposes
Churches must teach accurately about what marriage is and support families to keep their vows and raise children



Share



The idea that Christian marriage must embody the procreative and complementary natures of God’s love has been contentious. How essential are these? What are the consequences of dismissing these as essential?
39

[Notes]
SL



Share
What about this narrative is challenging? How does it contrast with the narrative of sexual fulfillment offered by culture and many churches?

How is this narrative good and beautiful and compelling for LGBT+ people?



63



PRACTIAL


[Notes]
I want to end with 4 practical questions:
how can we offer compassion and humility?
how can gay people meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways?
What hope can gay people find in God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship?
how can we pastorally walk alongside parents and kids who hold a progressive sexual ethic?




Intentionally “do life” with gay people
Include them
This doesn’t mean gay people are a project

Posture

Become

[Notes]
It starts with a right posture of humility, empathy, compassion, and patience.
So what does this posture look like?
Historically, the LGBT+ people in our pews, especially teens, don’t see pastors and church leaders as safe people to talk to. And when over 50% of gay people who are raised in church leave the faith (Us Versus Us, Andrew Marin), we have a problem. Gay people are watching, looking for those they can safely share with: Who can I trust? Who makes the gay jokes? What is said in sermons and in Sunday School about gay people? What will my pastor think of me? Can I find family here?
How do we demonstrate safety?

-Intentionally “do life” with the gay people in your church family. Include them in your friend group, your celebrations, your holidays. Have them in your home often.
This doesn’t mean that you should make a gay person your project or seek to check the “gay friend” box off your Christian to-do list, but it does mean that we can find those on the margins in our churches and seek to provide family for them.





Listen well
Invite your gay friend to share their story
Listening forms and solidifies authentic relationship

Posture

Become

[Notes]
-Listen well. To listen with an attitude of humility and openness is an act of love. Strive to foster a relational dynamic of trust. Invite your gay friend to share his or her story and listen without assumptions or judgment or ultimatums. Stories are so important because stories remind us that we can’t make blanket assumptions about gay people; if you’ve heard one gay person’s story, you’ve heard one gay person’s story. Even when we have been front and center to the challenges of a gay family member or close friend, there is some level of understanding that can only be gained by personal experience.  Recognizing this communicates to the gay person that you value his or her unique story.
And listening, really listening, forms and solidifies authentic relationship. And without relationship, without genuine love and trust, any truths we share will fall on hard ground.




The Church doesn’t get a pass
Give space for LGB people to share where your church could improve
Be willing to apologize

Posture

Become

[Notes]
How can we minister to those who have been hurt by the Church or by Christians?
-The Church doesn’t get a pass on caring for gay people well.  
Many gay people have heard, “Be content in all circumstances. This is teaching you to trust Him.  God is enough.”  Saying that to grieving, hurting, confused, lonely, possibly suicidal people is the antithesis of Christ’s love.  And even if we aren’t saying those words, the lack of family and friendship, care and concern, and right theology and teaching is loud.
Humbly giving space for LGB people to talk about what they see in their own churches to their own church leadership, knowing that leadership will listen, shows care and concern. Give LGB people permission to let you know when and where your church could improve.  Humbly listen.  And then seek to make real changes.
We are called to be radical in our love for and family toward those on the margins, those who have experienced hurt at the hands of others, even Christians, even those who can’t tolerate being told that “God is enough” and those who are difficult to love.
Many Christians have made mistakes in the conversation surrounding faith and sexuality.  Many churches aren’t places where gay people can thrive with reasonable effort in their vocation. Unfortunately, few have apologized.
You don’t need to apologize for your beliefs or say, “I’m sorry for Christianity’s view of marriage.”  But you CAN say, “I’m sorry for how some Christians have mistreated LGBTQ+ people – it really breaks my heart. I’m sorry that our church isn’t a place where you can find committed, lived-in family right now. This isn’t the way it’s supposed to be.”
You don’t need to apologize for holding a traditional sexual ethic, but it’s possible that the manner and tone of your belief has hurt someone who’s gay.  A sincere apology can go a long way.






 How do I meet my intimacy needs?
Ask, “What do you really need?”
Normalize
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Recognize meeting intimacy needs in healthy ways as an important spiritual discipline
Ministering: Core Q’s

Become

[Notes]
First ask what do you really need?
Do you really need something sexual or romantic?
Or do you need someone to talk, someone you know will be home when you get home, someone to celebrate with, someone to hold you when you cry
Often when we describe what we really need, its rarely something exclusively romantic or sexual

Next, normalize having intimacy needs, needing other people
If Jesus, the author and perfector of our faith needed the angels to attend to him in the wilderness and begged his disciples to stay up with him and pray with him before he was taken away—if our savior was a human with intimacy needs, its okay for us to have needs, its normal

Then recognize that if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, our broken flesh will reach out for unsatisfying and destructive alternatives
Therefore, proactively meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways is an important part of taking care of our temple
As Christians who reject spirit-body dualism, we need to embrace that taking care of our body is just as important as taking care of our soul
So our intimacy needs aren’t something to be ignored, they are something to be fulfilled






 How do I meet my intimacy needs?
Same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy intimacy that have been sexualized
Seek healthy relationships with safe friends

Ministering: Core Q’s

Become

[Notes]
Next, we can point out that same-sex attractions are unmet needs for healthy same-sex intimacy that have been sexualized
This doesn’t mean that if I meet all of my intimacy needs today, I won’t be gay tomorrow
But I have seen that when I’m getting what I really need—healthy friendship with other men—my desires for something romantic or sexual are easier to dismiss

So encourage those you disciple to seek out healthy relationships with safe friends
My life got better when I stopped ignoring my loneliness and started meeting my needs in healthy ways with deep friendship
And to this day, if I am struggling with lust, instead of shaming myself, I want my first response to be asking myself whether I have been meeting my intimacy needs in healthy ways (which I haven’t)

I think some of this question isn’t just “what can I do with my loneliness today?”
But also, “how do I keep from being lonely in my 40s, 50s, and so on?”
To answer that, lets move to the last big question






 What does the future look like?
A lifetime of sanctification and sexual stewardship
Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world
Obedience to God’s teachings and surrendering our brokenness to God will bring goodness (Jeremiah 7:23)
Ministering: Core Q’s

Become

[Notes]
For gay people like me who have been stewarding our sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic for awhile, particularly in celibacy, this is our biggest question
We can white-knuckle our way through celibacy for a couple of years
But after awhile its exhausting to walk out a vocation with often little support from our church, family, or friends
Plus as we age, our friends get married, have kids, and don’t have time or space for us in their lives
We’re tired of hearing pastors tell us, “Jesus can be everything you need,” when those pastors don’t live that life
Those pastors have a spouse and kids to go home to every night

So, what future can gay Christian hope for?

[discuss the points]











 What does the future look like?
God invites everyone to vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
At churches that have become places where gay people can thrive according to God’s wisdom, both are equally good and available to gay people
Ministering: Core Q’s

Become

[Notes]
But there in lies the problem
I’ve never met a church that is a place where gay people can thrive—with reasonable effort—according to a traditional sexual ethic
If we’re being honest, most of your churches aren’t places that can offer gay people much hope right now
The best way you can answer this question is by being honest
For most of you, an honest answer is, “I wish this weren’t the case, but our church has been doing a poor job of supporting single and gay people for decades. I wish I could promise you that that will get better soon, but I can’t. The cross you’ll bear will probably be more painful than many of your peers. I am sorry. The world is not supposed to be this way. Our church is not supposed to be this way. So I personally give you permission to hold my feet to the fire on this. Don’t stop reminding me that things must be different, and quickly.”

Don’t be afraid to apologize for the sins of the Church, confess on behalf of the church
You don’t need to apologize for your beliefs, but you can apologize that the Church hasn’t done enough to be a place where gay people could thrive with reasonable effort according to a traditional sexual ethic

And finally after you apologize, affirm their need for committed, intimate family
Ultimately, they want hope that they will find family
God has created each of us for family
Yet most gay people have had a hard time finding it
So help them find that

SOMETHING ABOUT teach, model, celebrate, discern, family -> celibacy/MOMs
FOR KIDS




Application: BECOME
What is the best way to love Side A gay Christians?
Trust the Holy Spirit
Walk alongside
Call straight Christians to submit their sexualities to God
Call the Church to support celibacy and mixed-orientation marriages




Become

[Notes]
What is the best way to love gay Christians who believe God blesses same-sex marriages?
As we noted in our training, we must have a posture of trusting and being patient with the Holy Spirit to reveal what is true to all of us according to His timing.
We can continue to nurture a meaningful relationship with the person and support that person in seeking greater goodness where he or she asks for help.
In the meantime, we can get busy helping our church offer something truly better!
To be frank, if your church isn’t offering anything better to LGBT+ people yet, why would that person ever want to steward his or her sexuality differently?
Start by calling straight Christians to meaningful, life-giving, and often inconvenient sexual stewardship and making your church a place where celibate Christians (gay or straight) can find meaningful community.
