ETHOS STAFF TEAM TRAINING:Ministering toSexual Minorities
presented by

Pieter Valk
Executive Director
EQUIP NASHVILLE
Training Objective
To gain the understanding and skills needed to love and serve sexual minorities at Ethos Church


[Notes]
homosexual activity (both sexual and romantic) are sinful
but to experience same-sex attraction is not a sin
what does SSA mean?
SSA vs sexual minority


Training Overview
Part One: Theology & Being a Friend
Part Two: Story & Development of SSA
Part Three: How to Minister


[Notes]
disclaimer: not exhaustive
questions and clarification
PART THREE:How to Minister
Session Goal
To learn how to minister to sexual minorities

LGBT+ Persons
Be compassionate
Respect their right to choose
Minister to core wounds
Trust the Holy Spirit


[Notes]
next section applies to all who experience same-sex attraction—both LGBT+ and traditional sexual ethic, but want to address specifics to ministering to LGBT+ persons

be compassionate 
     recognize sins of the Church 
     motivated by desire for the best things 
respect right to choose 
     you can’t control their choice anyway 
     just want them to be honest with themselves 
minister to core wounds 
trust the HS 
     obedience, not results 

How to Minister:Core Q’s
Ministering: Core Q’s
Will you treat me differently now that you know?
honesty
honor courage in sharing

Ministering: Core Q’s
How do I make sense of how I feel?
Why did God let this happen?
What is normal? What is abnormal?
How did this happen?

Ministering: Core Q’s
How do I refrain from behavior?
pray for strength
eliminate opportunities
accountability


[Notes]
Covenant Eyes
Ministering: Core Q’s
What do I do with all of this shame?
Satan’s primary weapon
Our response:
Identify & Replace
Share

Ministering: Core Q’s

5. Where do I find my identity? Where do I belong?

Sexuality

Work
Friend
Child



Christianity

Parent
Sibling
Member of Ethos


Ministering: Core Q’s

6. How do I meet my intimacy needs?
What are my needs?
Normalize
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane
Stewardship of meeting in healthy ways


[Notes]
do you need sex or intimacy
Ministering: Core Q’s

Can you help me?
Minister to Core Wounds
Family of Origin
Gender Identification
Inaccurate Beliefs/Theology
Counseling for Sexual Abuse, Addiction, and Psychological Issues
Ministering: Core Q’s

What can I expect?
No promise of change in same-sex attraction
obsess over eliminating SSA
seek understanding of SSA
manage temptation
intimacy with God and His family and working to heal/redeem the world

54
Discussion
To which of those questions do you feel most confident in responding? 
Which of those questions would you be most uncomfortable helping someone walk through?  

58

[Notes]
minister: maybe you only get to a few of these questions
Case Studies

[Notes]
case study describing person with OSA
but could just as easily be about SSA

ask you to read and discuss as a group what you think the core issues are and how you would minister
then consider if that would be different if SSA
Scenario 1
Dan is a Christian, but he hasn’t gone a month without having sex with a girl in years. He goes to clubs most weekends looking for a girl to take home. He has had sex with most of the women his age at work. He needs it, but it never seems to be satisfying. He comes to you looking for advice. He knows it is wrong, but he doesn’t know how to stop.

1.Core Issues?		2. How to Minister?		3.Would It Change?
sexual addiction
lack of healthy intimacy
64

[Notes]
Effective: 	help him identify what he really need and get that in healthy ways: healthy, intimacy Christian community
		practical steps to reduce unwanted behavior (accountability)

Poor:		shame-based behavior modification
		prayer and bible study to become “stronger”

Scenario 2
Jake is addicted to pornography and masturbation. Every night before he goes to bed, he types in his favorite porn site, watches a few videos until he finds girls that turn him on, and then masturbates. It’s gotten to the point that he is less aroused by the girls, but when he has tried not to masturbate before going to bed, he can’t seem to go to sleep. He knows it is wrong, but he doesn’t know how to stop.

1.Core Issues?		2. How to Minister?		3.Would It Change?
sexual addiction
lack of healthy intimacy
68

[Notes]
Effective: 	help him identify what he really need and get that in healthy ways: healthy, intimacy Christian community
		practical steps to reduce unwanted behavior (Covenant Eyes + accountability)

Poor:		shame-based behavior modification
		prayer and bible study to become “stronger”
Scenario 3
After getting to know Robert, he shares with you that he has never felt like a man. He’s attracted to women and all, but he just doesn’t feel very manly. He is pretty passive, he isn’t good at sports, he can’t grow facial hair, and he has a higher-pitched voice. He talks about how his dad was a man’s man but they were never close and that in middle school and high school, he never felt like one of the guys. He asks you, “What does it mean to be a man, and how can I become more of one?”

1.Core Issues?		2. How to Minister?		3.Would It Change?
deflated masculinity
72

[Notes]
Effective:	investigate what he thinks it means to be a man and Biblical masculinity
		identify masculine strengths already possess
		encourage steps to grow

Poor:		push hyper-masculine American schema unto him
		“maybe you’re just less manly, but that’s okay”
Scenario 4
Jane shares that she is really lonely. She has felt kind of depressed, but she isn’t suicidal. She says that she has lots of friends and they do fun stuff together all of the time, but she still seems to feel alone. After she describes her friends and what they do together, you get the feeling that they are really superficial relationships and what Jane is lacking is true intimacy in her friendships. 

1.Core Issues?		2. How to Minister?		3.Would It Change?
depression
lack of healthy intimacy
76

[Notes]
Effective:	talk about what spiritual friendship is and how to do it
		intimacy needs inventory and how to satisfy in healthy ways	

Poor:		you can find all the intimacy you need in Christ—just spend more time in prayer and bible study
		you probably need a husband
Scenario 5
Martha has always been very insecure. She never feels beautiful enough, popular enough, or smart enough. She is ashamed of her small breasts and the fat under her arms. She has little sense of self worth, and while she says she is a Christian and finds her identity in Christ, she doesn’t really seem to know her value as a person in Christ.

1.Core Issues?		2. How to Minister?		3.Would It Change?
low self-worth
body shame
80

[Notes]
Effective:	investigate negative messages of self-worth: why does she need to be popular or smart or beautiful?
		does she think that she isn’t worthy of love?
		demonstrate by your love that that isn’t true and help her find healthy intimacy to reinforce
		talk about body shame and help reject messages from society

Poor:		just find your identity in Christ and you will find value and meaning
		work out and go back to school

Training Review
Part One: Theology & Being a Friend
Part Two: Story & Development of SSA
Part Three: How to Minister

Call to Action
Get involved at Ethos
Get involved in Nashville
Support the work financially
Refer potential leaders


[Notes]
House Church Leader Training
SUPPORT GROUP!!!
Surveys & Questions
85
