Hi Friends! EQUIP has some exciting news! I’d like to introduce to you EQUIP’s Exclusive Access: small-group classes with an EQUIP Expert.
We’ve wanted to create an intimate space where everyday Christians can dig deeper into the intersection of faith and sexuality. So, we’ve capped each class at only six people so everyone has time to explore their questions with classmates and an EQUIP Expert. That’s why we’ve called these classes Exclusive Access. As a class attendee, you’ll have direct access to an expert.
Each class will meet once a week for 4 weeks. There will be two virtual classes each month during the fall months of September, October, and November. EQUIP is committed to helping Christians better love gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic. Learn with us this fall through EQUIP’s Exclusive Access.
Visit equipyourcommunity.org/exclusive today to learn more about this month’s class offerings and register for just $25. Space is limited, so register today!
Hi Friends! Hopefully you’ve heard about EQUIP’s new opportunity called Exclusive Access: small-group classes with an EQUIP Expert.
In September, we’re running two different virtual, 4-week classes.First, we’ve got “Loving LGB Christian Women Well” led by EQUIP Expert Lindsey Snyder. 
This class will explore the complexity of teenage girls’ sexuality, meaningful discipleship of LGB teenage girls, and the compounding effects of culture’s shifting views on morality, gay people, and women. Learn how to better minister to LGB Christian women according to a traditional biblical sexual ethic.
Then second, we’ve got “Preparing for National Coming Out Day” led by EQUIP Expert Pieter Valk.
In anticipation of National Coming Out Day on October 11th, 2020, in this class you’ll learn why people choose to come out and the risks they face, gain a deeper understanding of the history and motivations of gay pride, and discover how to respond compassionately to coming out.
Visit equipyourcommunity.org/exclusive today to register for one of these September Classes for just $25. Space is limited, so register today!
