


CHRISTIAN

& GAY?

[Notes]
Last time we talked about what Jesus had to teach us about stewarding our sexuality
In particular, we highlighted how singleness is an equally good and beautiful calling for many Christians
I shared that one of the reasons that that conversation matters so much to me is that I am a Christian, I am gay, and I feel called to steward that by remaining single and not seeking out romantic relationships with men

Today I want to pick up where we left of
I’ll share more about my story
And then we will explore what God thinks about same-sex attraction and same-sex marriage

From the very beginning I want to address a question you might all be wondering: why does this even matter? Why do Christians talk so much about this? Why does it matter whether same-sex romance and sex are sins?
Well, we as Christians are one big family
And we love each other
And if we love people, we want the best things for them
And we don’t want them to get hurt
sin is one source of hurt and pain
So it matters that we know what things are sins so we can encourage those we love to avoid them
How sad would it be if we realized we were encouraging those we loved to do things that hurt them?



MY STORY


[Notes]
I grew up rarely hearing my church talk about SSA
and when they did, it was a simple statement that God is against homosexuality

early middle school realize SSA
silence of parents and church -> make sense of this by myself

ashamed—I am not how I am supposed to be, and it is somehow my fault
alone—can someone be both gay and Christian? I must be the only one
afraid—if I tell my parents and friends, they will reject me

so prayed and read the Bible hoping God will make me straight
but after years, nothing changes

so looked around and wondered what my options were
not attracted to women romantically or sexually
certainly not in the way other guys talk about women, and that seems to be necessary for marriage to work
so getting married to a woman wasn’t an option
my beliefs told me marriage with a man wasn’t an option
so the only option left was lifelong singleness

but that prospect didn’t look good either
didn’t know anyone who has thrived as single for a lifetime
not value or taught or celebrated

eventually, told parents, friends, and pastors
some react very poorly
but some reacted well
when I was a sophomore shared my story with christian community
led to deep friendships with other SSA guys

Since then, a big part of my life has been figuring out what God thinks about all of this
Discovering what good things God has in store for me in light of the fact that I am gay and Christian
And helping churches better serve people like me




My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin. (Matthew 6:12-13; James 1:14-15; Hebrews 4:15) 

Same-sex romantic/sexual activity is a sin. (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

God does not promise that a person’s same-sex attraction will change in this lifetime.

We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.

[Notes]
Ultimately these are my beliefs



My Beliefs



Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all. (John 10:28-30; Romans 8:38-39; Ephesians 4:30) 

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully. (Ezekiel 36:26) 



My Beliefs



God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like. (Hebrews 13; Acts 2: 42-47) 

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ. (1 Corinthians 12:12-31) 



Share



Many of you have gay friends or family members. Some of you are gay yourself. What is difficult about being Christian and gay?
23



THE BIBLE?


[Notes]
When we ask the question: What does God think about same-sex attractions and same-sex marriage, we need to start with the Bible

Let’s start with the 6 passages that many claim declares same-sex sexual activity a sin

With each of these I’ll share with you both the traditional interpretation and a more progressive interpretation



Genesis 19



Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by God for their oppression, adultery, lying, abetting criminals, arrogance, complacency, indifference to the poor, gang rape, homosexual conduct, inhospitality, etc.

In the specific event that led to the cities’ destruction, all of the men of Sodom came to Lot’s house and demanded he hand over the angels in his house who had taken male form so that the men could have sex with them

[Notes]
Some focus on the sexual sin and particularly the homosexual conduct
others focus on the inhospitality or sexual excess




Leviticus 18 and 20



“You shall not lie with a male as with a woman; it is an abomination.” (Lev 18: 22)

“If a man lies with a male as with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.” (Lev 20:13)


[Notes]
Some focus on the same-sex sexual activity
Others claim these prohibitions are in the context of prostitution or against men playing the passive role in sex




Romans 1:18-32



“Even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones. In the same way men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another.” (Romans 1:26-27)

[Notes]
Some focus on same-sex attraction being fallen and same-sex sexual activity being sinful
Others focus on this being sexual excess or having sex contrary to one’s orientation




1 Corinthians 6:9-10



“Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.”

[Notes]
“the sexually immoral” = malakoi = effeminate man, passive partner in same-sex sex, male prostitutes
“men who practice homosexuality” = arsenokoitai = general term for same-sex sex
Some claim that Paul is condemning both the active and passive partner in male same-sex sex
Others claim that Paul is merely condemning effeminate men and sexual excess



1 Timothy 1:8-10



”The law is not laid down for the just but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who strike their fathers and mothers, for murderers, the sexually immoral, men who practice homosexuality, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine.

[Notes]
Same as before



What does the Bible say?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

Marriage defined between man and women (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:4-5) 

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage (Genesis 19:1-9) 

Written for a people in a time and place

[Notes]
So ultimately, what does the Bible say?

Preponderance, not certainty



The Big Question



We should NOT be asking, “What is permissible?”

We should be asking, “What is most good and will bring the most blessing in my life?”

[Notes]
Many push back against those 6 verses, saying that they don’t condemn same-sex, loving, monogamous marriages with certainty, so we have the freedom to do what we want
But really, that’s a person who wants something to be true and unless there’s an undeniable argument against it
We shouldn’t be asking “is this permissible?”

We should be asking what is most good?
What will bring the most blessing to my life?
And then don’t settle for anything less

I don’t think same-sex romantic and sexual relationships are God’s best for anyone
I think asking the question “what is permissible” only leads to pain
I think the best things God has to offer me are the same things he has to offer everyone else: celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex



SIDE A, B, & X


[Notes]
So there are a lot of different interpretations of those verses
To simplify this conversation, I want to describe 3 campus for answering the question: What does God think about same-sex attraction and SSM?



Side A



God makes people gay
God blesses same-sex marriages in the same ways that He blesses opposite-sex marriages
Requires theological maneuvering or a belief that the Bible is not binding/prescriptive for a modern context 



Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All people are called to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways




Side X



Same-sex attracted Christians must reject their attractions and work toward change
Continuing to experience SSA is a sign of willful disobedience
Homosexuality is sinful
God intends for all people to marry someone of the opposite sex



Share



Which “Side” makes the most sense to you and why? How is that informed by the Bible? Christian teaching over the past 2,000 years? Culture?
49



WHY SIDE B?


[Notes]
and then share why I’ve arrive at the beliefs I have



Honestly, I wish…



Most Side A gay Christians I know are no longer Christians
Straight Christians with a Side A perspective can keep doubt of the Bible’s authority in a box
Gay Christians cannot, and the result is destructive for the foundation of their faiths

[Notes]
I wish I could convince myself of Side A and I wish I was confident that would turn out well for me
But anecdotally, a vast majority of the gay Christians I know that went Side A eventually stopped being a Christian all together
How can that be?
As we pointed out earlier, a Side A perspective either requires some nuanced theological maneuvering or believing that the Bible is no longer binding or prescriptive
straight people can have these doubts about Scripture specifically around homosexuality but put that in a box and keep it from impacting the way the Bible informs their faith generally

But a gay Christian with a Side A perspective can’t do that…

But even if that wasn’t the case, I can’t get myself their logically
I can’t get the Bible or Christian teaching to allow me



Why Side B?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

Marriage defined between man and women (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:4-5) 

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage (Genesis 19:1-9) 

Written for a people in a time and place

[Notes]
We’ve seen this slide already
I think if all we had was the Bible, there’s significantly more evidence for a traditional sexual ethic



Why Side B?



All first called to a period of abstinent singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to lifelong marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Others called to celibacy and intimate family in the Body of Christ

[Notes]
But we don’t just have the Bible
God has given the Church the authority to provide further clarity when the Bible isn’t absolutely clear
And the reality is, the Church, Church mothers and fathers, and Christians have taught and believed consistently over the past 2000 years about how God has invited us to steward our sexualities that lead us to some pretty clear conclusions about what God thinks about same-sex attraction and same-sex marriage

Let me explain…



Share
Based on the preponderance of Biblical support and historical teaching about sexuality, how does God think about same-sex attraction? Same-sex sexual and romantic intimacy? Same-sex marriage?






Why Side B?
Same-sex attraction is not God’s intention and is a result of the Fall
Same-sex sexual/romantic activity is sinful
God does not bless same-sex marriages because they fall outside of God’s design for marriage
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses




[Notes]
We don’t even need to clobber passages to arrive at 3 and 4, which highlights that regardless of debate around their specific meaning, the broader narrative of scripture does not bless same-sex marriage



Why Side B?



If the Church did this well, it would be a place where those who experience SSA could thrive in celibacy or a mixed orientation marriage (MOM)

Their callings would be just as beautiful and the challenges would be no greater

[Notes]
Ultimately, it’s not enough for something to just be true
If something is really true, it should also lead to goodness and beauty
So I think it is fair to ask: how are these beliefs good for LGBT+ people?

if the Church did this well
celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex (just like straight people!)

calling just a beautiful and challenges no greater

Again, our argument is that asking whether something is permissible is the wrong question
We should be asking what is most good?
And God’s narrative says that for every person, the most good will be found in a period of abstinent singleness, celibacy, or marriage with someone of the opposite sex done correctly

But what would that look like?

church where celibacy taught and valued and just as good
other straight people celibate and thriving
Church that teaches accurately about the purposes of marriage
everyone enjoys meaningful community in the Body of Christ
so can thrive in MOM


Still, I will recognize that the Church isn’t there yet
And as we’ve highlight today, the Church is a challenging place for gay Christians
Which leads me to our last conversation




WHAT NEXT?


[Notes]
So what do we do with this?
How do we love our gay friends well?
And what do we do if we are gay?



Loving your gay friends



Treat them like anyone else
Give them space to talk, but don’t obsess
Point them toward what is best
Give them space to figure out what they believe
Educate yourself


[Notes]
They’re just like you—love them like you would anyone else
healthy intimacy
David and Jonathan

Give space to talk, but don’t obsess
ask your LGBT+ friends about it—they want and need to talk about it to get rid of their shame
you need to fully know them so that you can fully love them
but they may be fearful so you can initiate

Point toward what is best
loving gay people is wanting them to enjoy the best things this world has to offer—the best things God has to offer.
As we pointed out here, same-sex romantic relationships aren’t God’s best for anyone
Point them toward a relationship with Christ
Healthy friendship with others
And figuring out with God whether they are called to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex

give space to wrestle with theology
this is a consequential and complex conversation, but most spaces force people to choose a side and stop asking questions
that doesn’t lead to a lasting theology
so give grace as they make sense of all of this
allow for intellectual/theological discovery/process while continuing to default to stewarding sexuality according to traditional sexual ethic

Educate yourself
don’t make your friends be your teacher all of the time
if you want to have an opinion on this topic, learn
I will email reading suggestions



If you’re gay



You have nothing to be ashamed of
Seek out the best things God has to offer
We are all beautiful and broken
You don’t have to do this alone

[Notes]
You didn’t choose to be gay and you have nothing to be ashamed of
God doesn’t love you any less because you are gay and he has good and beautiful plans for you
You don’t have to become straight or marry someone of the opposite sex to be a full member of God’s family

And God didn’t make me gay, and same-sex attraction wasn’t God’s intention, but He allowed me to develop same-sex attraction through a mix of genetic and environmental factors
none of us are how God first imagined us—we are all corrupted at a genetic level and raised in a broken world that further injures us
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity aren’t God’s best for us
Don’t settle for anything less than the best
You were created for healthy intimacy with those of the same-sex-–seek that out!

Accept that we are all works in progress—we are all broken and beautiful
Thorn in Paul’s side

You don’t have to do this alone—seek out Kristi or me



QUESTIONS?

