
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

webinars
equip



[Notes]
Welcome to our Equip Webinar this month

I will send full notes from today’s webinar after we finish, so don’t worry if you miss something but didn’t get a chance to write it down

And finally, I will be recording the webinar to add this content to Equip’s Digital Leaders Course
And make available for individual purchase
But I will turn off recording before we get to Q&A at the end

ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and diaconate explorer in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (lifetime opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

From Involuntary Singleness to Thriving


[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today:
Singleness, especially when unchosen, can feel isolating. But it can also be an invitation to flourish.
Today we’re going to explore practical insights for embracing singleness with purpose and hope
Whether you’re single or supporting someone who is, I hope this session will equip you to thrive in any season of life.
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
to pursue that today, we’ll explore the following:
What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?
involuntary dangers


[Notes]
What if I told you that resisting your celibacy might be the very thing that’s making it unbearable?
A decade ago, I wasn’t ready to take ownership of my celibacy because vocational singleness didn’t seem good.
I was living in the second of what would eventually be four failed intentional Christian communities.
I hadn’t yet discovered how God would use my celibacy to build His kingdom.
I still had a fairly shallow appreciation of vocational singleness and Christian marriage
but couldn’t help but assume celibacy was lesser as I watched everyone around me celebrating fairytale weddings and posting idyllic honeymoon photos. 

Have you ever felt like the life you’re living doesn’t measure up to what you were told life was supposed to look like? 

If so, you’re not alone.
Involuntary dangers

[Notes]
I want you to reflect—does that resonate with you? 
Have you ever felt like the life you’re living doesn’t measure up to what you were told life was supposed to look like? 
If so, you’re not alone. Let’s unpack that together.
involuntary dangers


[Notes]
I remember one wedding that typified my experience those days.
The bride and the groom looked immaculate. And not because the guy tried.
For the entire decade I had known him he’d had flawless skin, perfect blonde hair, and effortless abs—you know the type.
But despite our meaningful friendship in college, I wasn’t asked to be a groomsman or invited to the bachelor party. 
Over the years as I shared publicly about my sexuality and challenged the idolatry of romance and the American dream, 
he stopped inviting me to couples-only events or hyper masculine no-homo adventures. 
So I sat in the back of the church at the wedding.

The sermon was a “greatest hits” of romance idolatry. 
The pastor said things like, “God made you specifically for each other to complete each other. 
Marriage is the best gift God has to offer, the highest form of love. 
On this side of heaven, nothing is more satisfying than marital love and being a parent.” 
The pastor reassured singles in the audience that God had marriage for each of us and that we could trust God because He is a good, good Father.

Every song at the reception was a reminder of what I wouldn’t have. 
“When God Made You” by Natalie Grant. “All of Me” by John Legend. 
“God Gave Me You” by Dave Barnes. “I Will Always Love You” by Whitney Houston. 
I caught myself over-analyzing every moment of the wedding, 
looking for opportunities to feel bad for myself and to prove to myself that my lot was more difficult than theirs.
I left before they cut the cake. I got tired of faking a smile. 
Tired of being asked to join in on dancing with perfectly cheerful people all angling for who they’d take home that night. 
Tired of sitting alone at my table waiting for a socially-acceptable time to leave. 
So I left, sat in my car, and cried. 
But the tears soon dried up, leaving me numb. 
I desperately wanted to feel something other than pain. 
I opened up my phone and tried to guess the password my roommates had set to keep me from downloading problematic apps. I couldn’t guess it, but over the next few days my resentment, self-pity, and numbness lingered.

At some point I asked a roommate to unlock my phone so I could update my apps, 
and then rushed out the door a couple of minutes later because I was “late for a coffee.” 
But I knew what I was doing. I knew my phone was still unlocked. That was the plan all along.

I downloaded an app and arranged a meaningless meetup with a stranger. 
Even before I left his house, numbness was completely replaced with shame and self-loathing. 
I remember yelling at myself in the car, 
“What the hell am I doing?! What’s wrong with me?! Why can't I stop?! 
How could I say I love God but then choose these things over and over again?”
My pity-party, bitterness, painful mistakes, and shame probably sound familiar to lots of single Christians these days. 
Unfortunately, many of us, gay and straight, have struggled with this kind of involuntary celibacy? 
This phenomena isn’t unique to gay Christians.

What if God has more for us? 

More than waiting. More than feeling like an afterthought in the Church.
Involuntary dangers

[Notes]
What about you?
If you’ve ever sat through a message like that and felt unseen, misunderstood, or even hurt, I want to validate that. 
And I also want to challenge us to consider—what if God has more for us? 
More than waiting. More than feeling like an afterthought in the Church.

incels: involuntary celibates
mostly straight white men frustrated by lack of romantic relationship
leading to self-hate, resenting women, entitlement, and violence
Involuntary dangers

[Notes]
In the 2000s a group of mostly white straight men frustrated by their lack of romantic relationship
coalesced on internet forums like 4chan and Reddit. 
They called themselves “incels,” short for involuntary celibates. 

But their commiseration eventually turned to self-hate, 
blaming and resenting women they desired but couldn’t have, 
a sense of entitlement to sex, 
and, increasingly, violence. 

Self-identified incels have committed 8 mass murders since 2014, resulting in 61 deaths. 
To put it lightly, involuntary celibacy is dangerous.

single Christians who see their celibacy as involuntary are VERY different
but we blame God (or others)
leading to self-pity, resentment, self-loathing, and self-destruction
Involuntary dangers

[Notes]
Now there are plenty of ways that single Christians who see our celibacy as involuntary 
are VERY different from this mostly white, straight, male internet subculture. 
A good chunk of single Christians are gay. Some are women. 
Our churches don’t promote an entitlement to sex, quite the opposite. 
Single Christians aren't know for committing murder or perpetrating any grave violence.

But I see a different, quieter form of it in the Church. 
Many single Christians—both gay and straight—feel forced into a celibacy that isn’t functionally good, 
blaming God or other Christians or ourselves. 
And similarly, our resistance to celibacy seems to lead to self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing 
that Satan uses to tempt us to self-destruction. 
I think it’s fitting to call some of us ‘Christian incels’ not as an insult, but as a warning: 
if we don’t address our struggles, we risk being consumed by them.

Those of us who are gay celibate Christians have already seen the Enemy drag too many people we love away from a historic sexual ethic or even further, away from God altogether. 
I’m afraid we’re going to lose more if we don’t do something. 
Among single Christians helping each other get through life, we often call ourselves chosen family. 
I think we’ve got to have a family conversation about Christian incels. 
We’ve got to expose the ways the Enemy is lying to us and manipulating us so we can save ourselves and those we love. 
But we don’t just have to settle for surviving. 
We can embrace our celibacy and learn to thrive in it for a lifetime, together. 
First, we’ve got to diagnose the problem.

Have you ever found yourself resenting your singleness?

If so, what if instead of seeing it as a burden, we learned how to reclaim it as something beautiful?
Involuntary dangers

[Notes]
I’m curious: Have you ever found yourself resenting your singleness? 
Feeling like you’re at a dead end? 
If so, what if instead of seeing it as a burden, we learned how to reclaim it as something beautiful?
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
So, why do Christians who feel like they’re in involuntary singleness resist our celibacy?
why weresist


[Notes]
Often when someone references the gift of celibacy, many of us are quick to point out that our singleness doesn’t feel like a gift. 
It doesn’t seem good. 
And you know, you’re right. 
In practice, functionally, in reality, vocational singleness is not good in most of our churches. 

And that’s not our fault—it’s not because celibate Christians aren’t trying hard enough. 

No, celibacy is unlivable in most of our churches because so many Christian leaders over the past century failed to teach rightly about vocational singleness or support it.

Churches haven’t taught what Jesus and Paul had to say about singleness in the Scriptures
Churches have taught us that we need and are owed marriage
As a result, few in our churches are living out the singleness of Paul
Why we resist

[Notes]
They’ve skipped over Bible passages about vocational singleness or accidentally conflated the singleness we’re born into with the singleness of Jesus and Paul. 

They’ve taught that we only have to be single if we want to, 
and that desires to marry and have kids are a reflection of God’s desires. 

They’ve led us to believe that marriage is the default path, 
that we need romance to be happy, 
and that we can take marriage as long as we save sex for marriage.
 
They’ve hesitated to teach publicly about a call to vocational singleness, 
stating in private that the calling is so obvious it never needs to be openly considered. 
And they’ve treated singleness as a disqualification for church leadership.

As a result, few straight people have committed to a life without romance for the sake of the kingdom. 
And if there is a celibate person in our church, parents have often told their kids that there must be something wrong with the person if they’re still single at 40.

Churches have taught that singleness is a call to loneliness for the gospel, an exchange of less human intimacy for more intimacy with God
Churches have told singles to get married if they’re lonely
Why we resist

[Notes]
On top of that, Christian leaders over the past century have unintentionally made vocational singleness impractical by neglecting to offer us family. 

They’ve taught indirectly and sometimes directly that vocational singleness is a call to loneliness for sake of the gospel. 
They’ve said that celibacy is an exchange of less human intimacy for more intimacy with God. 

They’ve taught that God calls only a select few to vocational singleness 
and sustains them with a magical gift of celibacy so large that the Church doesn’t need to do much. 

They’ve indirectly and sometimes directly told straight singles, widows, divorcees, and single parents to just get married if they’re lonely. 
We’ve been starved of intimacy and family.

Churches have pushed gay Christians into celibacy without discernment
Churches have held gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship, cultivating a poisonous victim mentality
Why we resist

[Notes]
Yet Christian leaders have still pushed particularly gay Christians into celibacy, right?! 
We haven’t been given time or space to figure out whether we are convinced of a historic sexual ethic. 
Instead we’ve been pressured to choose quickly, choose correctly, and become public apologists for a historic sexual ethic. 

While there’s seemingly been few consequences if straight Christians cohabitated before marriage, 
ignored God’s design for Christian marriage to be a space open to raising children for the sake of the kingdom, 
or engaged in unbiblical divorce and remarriage, 
it’s been different for gay Christians. 

When we slipped up or adopted a revisionist sexual ethic or got into a sexual relationship with someone of the same sex, 
we’ve been quickly confronted over coffee, 
flooded with judgmental Bible verses, 
dragged into church discipline meetings, 
and uninvited to holidays. 

That double standard has made us feel less-than, hated, unlovable, dirty, gross, and ashamed, 
all while cultivating in us a poisonous victim mentality.

Gay Christians have been afraid that making the wrong decision might send them to hell

Gay or straight, Christian celibacy has been made unlivable
Why we resist

[Notes]
Not to mention that many of us have been genuinely afraid that making the wrong decision might send us to hell. 
Many of us grew up being told that merely believing in a revisionist sexual ethic or engaging in same-sex sexual activity would be a fast-pass to hell. 

We’ve been told that God’s grace would never apply to a sin that shameful. 
Or maybe we’ve been warned that a revisionist sexual ethic is a slippery slope to loss of faith altogether. 

These worries have complicated our discernment, 
made it difficult to listen for God’s whispers that might be sweetly inviting us to embrace vocational singleness, 
and ultimately eaten away at our convictions. 

We’ve asked ourselves, “Am I truly convinced of a historic sexual ethic? 
Am I following this because I believe it is best for me? Or have I just been manipulated by a fear of pain and punishment? 
When this fear has loomed over my study of Scripture, prayers for wisdom, and conversations with family and pastors,
to what extent did I truly, freely choose any of this?”

Christian leaders have often taught poorly about vocational singleness, 
neglected to invite straight people to discern, 
failed to offer celibate people family, 
and pushed us into celibacy instead of giving us space and support to discern. 

All of this has made our celibacy unlivable.
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
So no, it’s not fair that an impractical celibacy has been forced on us. 
It makes sense that we haven’t wanted a celibacy that isn’t good. 

But here’s the problem: resisting our celibacy and hoping that someone else will make our celibacy good has been dangerous. 
the enemy’s strategy


[Notes]
It’s been dangerous because Satan has been using our self-pity and our resentment and our self-loathing against us—to lead us to destruction. 
He’s been tempting us with false ideas and false connection. 

In particular, the Enemy sometimes takes advantage of gay celibate Christians and our painful attempts to walk out celibacy by tempting us with a revisionist sexual ethic. 

First, he probes the gay Christian with seemingly reasonable questions:

Did Jesus even talk about gay sex?
Weren't the clobber passages just about rape or incest or adultery or gay cult prostitution or pederasty?
Could the authors of the Bible have even been talking about monogamous gay couples like we have today?...
The enemy’s strategy

[Notes]
Did Jesus even talk about gay sex?
Weren't the clobber passages just about rape or incest or adultery or gay cult prostitution or pederasty?
Could the authors of the Bible have even been talking about monogamous gay couples like we have today?
Weren't the leaders of the early Church mostly sexist, homophobic patriarchs?
Wasn't the Bible wrong about women and slavery?
Can I even trust my translations? Can I really trust the Church?
God doesn’t make mistakes, so the fact that I’m gay must mean God wanted me to be gay, right?
How could a good God say being gay is broken but then be unwilling to change it?
Straight people can enjoy romance outside of marriage, why can’t I?
Would a loving God really deprive me of a loving marriage?

"I’ve made up my mind. The arguments for a historic sex ethic aren’t 100% convincing. There’s bad fruit of both a historic sexual ethic and a revisionist sexual ethic. The two sides are basically morally equivalent. It just seems like a matter of personal truth. Celibacy is a personal choice. And I’m miserable in celibacy….”
The enemy’s strategy

[Notes]
After months or years of challenging a gay Christian's convictions with these questions 
(often without the support of siblings in Christ to externally process), 
Satan successfully uses our self-pity and resentment to lead us to some version of the following:

"I’ve made up my mind. The arguments for a historic sex ethic aren’t 100% convincing. 
There’s bad fruit of both a historic sexual ethic and a revisionist sexual ethic. 
The two sides are basically morally equivalent. It just seems like a matter of personal truth. 
Celibacy is a personal choice. And I’m miserable in celibacy. 
And God is merciful. He understands. He wants me to be happy. 
Gay romance and sex can’t really be that bad, right? 
I mean, if something feels good, that means God wants it for me, even if it seems to contradict the Church and Scriptures? 
Gay romance and sex feel good, so I’ve decided they must be good.”

Unfortunately, abandoning historic sexual ethics often leads to deconversion for gay Christians
Straight Christians, too, can be tricked by the difficulties of involuntary singleness into abandoning God’s wisdom
The enemy’s strategy

[Notes]
Even worse, some of these gay Christians tempted by false ideas eventually leave the faith altogether. 
At first they hesitate to call themselves Christians, and eventually they can't bring themselves to confess the Nicene Creed at all, the universal statement of Christian faith.

To be clear: I do not mean to suggest that people go to hell for holding a revisionist sexual ethic or for having gay sex and failing to repent of it. 
When Jesus offered His gift of salvation and to forgive all of our sins, past, present, and future, He meant it. 
All sin. Past, present, and future. Forgiven and saved. 

And yet, these false ideas appear to be part of some people’s journey to abandoning Jesus. 
They are spiritually dangerous. We need to consider these questions. 
The danger is in neglecting to recognize how dangerous these questions can be without people to hold us up and keep us safe.

For straight single Christians, waiting for marriage can feel unfair and lonely, leading to doubts like, 
Did Jesus really say I have to wait? 
If God gave me these desires, wouldn’t He want me to fulfill them? 

Over time, frustration and isolation can lead to the conclusion that waiting isn’t worth it—
God wants me to be happy, and sex and romance outside of marriage can’t be that bad. 

Some loosen their beliefs on sex, question the church’s teachings, and even drift from faith altogether. 

While failing to follow a traditional sexual ethic doesn’t disqualify anyone from God’s grace, 
wrestling with these doubts alone is spiritually dangerous. 
The real risk isn’t asking hard questions—it’s facing them without Christian community to provide support and truth.

Gay and straight Christians alike can be tempted with false connection along a slippery slope, making celibacy feel impossible and compromise feel inevitable
The enemy’s strategy

[Notes]
Other times, the Enemy takes advantage of our resentment and self-pity by tempting us with false connection. 
Even when gay Christians continue to be convinced of a traditional sexual ethic, they can be desperate for relationship to soothe the pain. 
Perhaps they make friends with queer people who hold different theological convictions—
who can empathize while not complicating the relationship with reminders of the failures of the Church or the impossibility of their convictions. 
Those friendship are just fun.

But too often those fun friendships eventually become sexual. 
At first these gay Christians might confess their slip-ups, but messing around can became routine. 
Satan can use our resentment, self-pity, and self-loathing to make it too difficult to make celibacy good and too easy to embrace self-destruction.

For straight single Christians, loneliness can also lead to seeking comfort in relationships that blur boundaries. 
Even those committed to waiting for marriage may form close friendships with people who don’t share their convictions
—connections that feel safe and freeing from church pressures. 

But over time, those friendships can turn romantic or sexual, sometimes gradually, sometimes in moments of weakness. 
At first, they may try to stop, but sin can become routine, making celibacy feel impossible and compromise feel inevitable. 

Many who once held to a historic sexual ethic have been led away, not just by doubts, 
but by the deep need for connection without Christian community to keep them grounded.

My hunch is that these stories are familiar to you because some of you have been tempted with false theology. 
Or with false connection. Or both. So how have we responded?



our (lacking) response


[Notes]
What have we, Christian incels, often done when the Enemy tempts us intellectually and emotionally?

We just seem to wait.

We leave the doors to our hearts and minds unlocked because we hope our protest will somehow convince God to change His mind
Or we’re trying to force ourselves to give up without taking responsibility for the decision
We’ve got to do something different! But what?!
Our (lacking) response

[Notes]
At first, maybe we wait for someone else to make our celibacy good or for our own efforts to pan out, but we give up hope of that eventually.

So we leave the doors to our hearts and minds unlocked because we hope our self-pity, our protest will somehow convince God to change His mind. 
Or convince our churches or our parents to change their theology.

Or, let’s be honest, some of us seem to flirt with the best arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic and fool around with people 
because we hope to force ourselves to change our minds. 

We want to give up but we don’t want to be responsible for the decision. 
So we wait, hoping enough anxiety and sadness and pain will overwhelm our own logic and finally trick us into changing our mind about all of this.

And, let’s be honest again, we aren’t fooling any of our friends or fooling God. 
We are just fooling ourselves. 
We are slowly putting down the cross Jesus has asked us to carry and opening our arms to the Enemy as if to say, “If you take me, I won’t resist.”

I know there’s a lot of worry in my words. 
Please believe me when I say that I do not want to add to your shame. 
What I’m doing is pleading us not to look away and for God to give us the strength to keep looking honestly. 
We have already lost so many friends to an involuntary celibacy that leads to abandoning a historic sexual ethic or God altogether. 
And I’m scared we’ll lose even more of us if we don’t do something different.

We’ve got to do something different! But what?!

This is why many of us resist our celibacy. Not because it’s inherently bad, but because no one has shown us how to make it good.
Our (lacking) response

[Notes]
This is why many of us resist our celibacy. 
Not because it’s inherently bad, but because no one has shown us how to make it good. 
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
So what do we do?
the ideal solution


[Notes]
The most direct solution is for Christian leaders to make our churches places where gay and straight people can thrive in vocational singleness with reasonable effort.

Our churches ought to teach about vocational singleness, help everyone discern, celebrate commitments, value as leaders, and help celibate find/build family
But, too many of us have waited for the Church to make celibacy good, to no avail
The ideal solution

[Notes]
To teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness, 
help everyone discern, 
celebrate and value vocational singleness, 
and help celibate people find family. 

Because it is the responsibility of Christian leaders today to undo the damage done by previous generations of Christian leaders, 
to follow in Christ’s footsteps by choosing to bear the burden of sins you didn’t commit 
to bring healing and wholeness to those suffering on the margins.

If I had another 30 minutes, I’d detail all of the practical steps you, Christian leaders, can take to foster thriving in celibacy. 
So if you’re a Christian leader or parent who wants to start taking practical steps, please send me an email. I’d love to talk!

But I want to spend the rest of my time speaking particularly to my single siblings in Christ. 
Because we’ve already waited for Christian leaders to take practical steps. 
I’m worried that if we continue waiting for Christian leaders to make our celibacy good for us, it will be too late. 
And while we’ve waited, we’ve made it too easy for the Enemy to tempt us to self-destruction. 
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
So we can’t wait. 
Instead, we must work together with the Holy Spirit and other Christian incels to make vocational singleness good for ourselves.

How?
own ourcelibacy


[Notes]
We’ve got to own our celibacy. 

Embrace your celibacy by earnestly discerning
Make long-term plans for kingdom work and spiritual family
Commit publicly, invite accountability, and celebrate anniversaries 
Receive the fullest gift of singleness from God
Own our celibacy

[Notes]
We’ve got to take intentional and incremental steps to embrace our celibacy by earnestly discerning.

I want to recognize that many of you have faithfully and laboriously tried to make your celibacy good already. 
You’ve fought hard. You are tired. 
And you may be disappointed by my solution, but hear me out. 
We don’t need to try harder. We need to try smarter. 
I think there’s some strategies we could better employ.

We’ve got to own our celibacy because there are significant advantages to being all-in. 

When you embrace your celibacy, you can make long-term plans with spiritual family and invest deeply in kingdom work, 
while others can only make short-term plans and invest shallowly 
because they’re keeping their options open to reorganize their lives around a future Christian marriage 
(or, let’s be honest, a future gay marriage). 

If you’re willing to commit to vocational singleness, you can mark those commitments publicly, 
celebrate and honor your celibacy with friends and family, 
invite them to hold you accountable and support you, 
and celebrate the anniversary of that commitment each year—renewing you and drawing you forward. 

When you embrace your celibacy, you’re free to focus on your kingdom work and spiritual family with undivided attention, 
instead of wasting time and energy questioning and deliberating and convincing yourself to be celibate for one more day, day after day after day. 

Owning your celibacy may help you see yourself more fully in the vocational singleness of Jesus, Paul, and so many heroes of the faith. 

Plus, the oldest Christian traditions teach that in order to receive the fullest gift of grace from God to thrive in vocational singleness, 
you have to actually settle down into the vocation. 

In short, even if vocational singleness feels like the only option, 
there are huge benefits to embracing your celibacy versus spending a lifetime running away from it and choosing not to own it.

Choosing celibacy doesn’t mean rejecting marriage out of cynicism
It means trusting God enough to settle into a vocation with purpose and freedom, rather than spending years waiting for something that may never come
Discernment can help us choose our celibacy
Own our celibacy

[Notes]
Some single straight Christians push back
—Even if I think I’ll be single long-term, why not just keep my options open? 
Why close the door on marriage and settle into celibacy? 

But waiting indefinitely keeps you in a constant state of uncertainty, 
preventing you from fully investing in the life God has for you now. 

If singleness is likely, delaying a decision out of fear or false hope can leave you stuck, 
hesitating to build deep relationships or commit to ministry. 

Choosing celibacy doesn’t mean rejecting marriage out of cynicism
—it means trusting God enough to settle into a vocation with purpose and freedom, 
rather than spending years waiting for something that may never come.

And discernment can help us own our celibacy. 
You see, discernment is about much more than just identifying the most likely path forward. 
It's also about accepting, embracing, choosing, taking a leap of faith, seeking confirmation, and stepping forward. 

Discernment can help us move from seeing our celibacy as involuntary to seeing our celibacy as chosen.

I can’t offer you a foolproof, step-by-step process. 
But I can at least share what my discernment has looked like and what helped me embrace my celibacy. 

Maybe you’ll find in my story risks you haven’t taken yet, 
resources you haven’t gathered before, 
or full measures where you’ve only previously taken half measures. 

We can get stuck in unresolve griefs when they aren’t named or honored
Process sadness, anger, and fear with a trusted friend/mentor
Gather with others, hold the pain before God, and give yourself time/space to feel
1. Mourn the involuntary

[Notes]
My discernment started with mourning.

Pauline Boss’s book Ambiguous Loss explains how we get stuck in unresolved griefs 
when our losses aren’t named or honored by the community around us and there are no rituals or customs for mourning. 

My involuntary celibacy and my sense of losing the possibility of marriage was an ambiguous loss. 
So I named that hurt before God. 

I processed my sadness and anger and fear around celibacy with my therapist, 
and while we were at it, we tackled some of my self-pity, resentment, self-loathing, and self-destruction. 

Some of you might find it helpful to gather with others of similar circumstances who empathize most easily, 
hold the pain of involuntary celibacy before God and each other, 
and give yourself time and space to feel. 

Hurting parts of us won’t let us reach toward the future if they’re still hanging on to unresolved grief in the past.

Have you actually grieved what you’ve lost?
1. Mourn the involuntary

[Notes]
What about you? Have you actually grieved what you’ve lost?

Grow your general capacity for discernment
Meet with a spiritual director
Give your discernment time
2. Learn to discern

[Notes]
Second, I was able to start patiently discerning by growing my capacity for general Christian discernment.

I read the book God’s Voice Within by Mark Thibodeaux, a great primer for the oldest form of Christian discernment. 

That book taught me how to bring a question before God, 
consider Scripture, 
consider practical aspects of my question, 
seek advice from spiritual mentors, 
arrive at a potential conclusion, 
hold that conclusion before God, 
seek confirmation through small steps, 
and move forward with confidence. 

Some of you might find it helpful to meet with a spiritual director to guide your discernment. 

Oh, and I said patiently discern. 
I started intentionally discerning in 2018 and didn’t make lifetime commitments until 2023.

Throughout that time I asked a prayer team of friends, my parents, people at church, mentors, and pastors 
to pray for my discernment and speak into my discernment.

Maybe you’ve accepted that this is your path, but you don’t know how to move forward. Start here—practice discernment.
2. Learn to discern

[Notes]
Maybe that’s where you are right now.
Maybe you’ve accepted that this is your path, but you don’t know how to move forward. 
Start here—practice discernment.

Expand your understanding of vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Notice that vocational singleness and Christian marriage are equally beautiful and difficult, equally kingdom-building and gospel-sharing, equally a call to family and bringing life to a broken world. 
3. Deepen theology

[Notes]
Third, deepening my understanding of vocational singleness and Christian marriage helped me discern and own my celibacy. 

I pored over how the Church has historically spoken about God’s design for the vocations of celibacy and marriage, 
and I discovered that they are both more beautiful and more difficult than cultural Christianity had led me to believe. 

I discovered that the vocational singleness Jesus and Paul lived and taught about is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for kingdom work with undivided attention. 

That vocational singleness done right leverages the first fruits of our labors to bring about the New Jerusalem more quickly, 
blessing our communities and giving the whole Church hope for Christ's return. 

That it’s still a call to lifelong, lived-in human family that images the Trinity and through which God tangibly loves celibates. 

In short, vocational singleness and Christian marriage are equally beautiful and difficult, 
equally kingdom-building and gospel-sharing, 
equally a call to family and bringing life to a broken world. 

Plus, being a godparent gave me a chance to see these ideas lived out. 
I saw firsthand that marriage isn’t better or easier than celibacy. 
That the grass isn’t greener on the other side. 

Spending consistent time with Christian marriages faithfully leaning into their vocation convinced me I’m not being cheated and made it easier for me to embrace my call.

When was the last time you read about celibacy in Scripture—not just as an exception, but as a calling?
3. Deepen theology

[Notes]
I’m curious: When was the last time you read about celibacy in Scripture—not just as an exception, but as a calling?

The point of vocational singleness is to be available for kingdom work
Discover how God might be calling you to leverage your availability to care for the poor and needy in ways parents don’t have the time or energy
4. Kingdom work calling

[Notes]
Fourth, figuring out what kind of kingdom work I could do with my availability in vocational singleness also helped me discern and own my celibacy.

Pastors, teachers, and those in the helping professions that require numerous hours of work after 5pm 
will tell you that it’s difficult to be a good parent to both children at home and your church, classroom, etc. 

In 1 Corinthians 7:32-35, Paul praises vocational singleness because committed celibates can do kingdom work with undivided attention. 
We don’t have to split our focus between the important and costly kingdom work of raising kids and other kingdom work. 

The point of vocational singleness isn’t to sit on a shelf for God to admire our virginity like some never-opened comic book. 
The point of vocational singleness is to be available for kingdom work. 

Yes, we’re called to abstinence, 
but the key to thriving in vocational singleness is actually leveraging our availability to participate in a unique way in God’s work in the world. 

Years ago when I accepted God’s call on my life to teach parents and pastors how to better minister to gay people according to historic sexual ethics, that calling gave purpose to my celibacy. 

And the more I’ve stepped into the kingdom work God has called me to, the more I’ve become convinced that my celibacy isn’t an accident or an after-thought. 

My celibacy is necessary, because my kingdom work would suffer if I had to divide my time and energy between work and raising children. 

I’d encourage you to check out the book Kingdom Calling by Amy Sherman. 
In it, she defines kingdom work broadly as any work that brings wholeness to those who are hurting, treats workers justly, and uses resources responsibly.
And the book explores how Christians can discover the kingdom work God has for them. Dream with God about what He might be calling you to.

We’re all made for lifelong, lived-in human family, including celibates
Live with biofam, a nuclear family at church, or an intentional Christian community
Consider moving cities or building something new to get what you need
5. Find your family

[Notes]
Fifth and probably most importantly in my discernment, I had to find family. 

After college I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community. 
But each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict. 
And every time I connected deeply with people in healthy ways—only for that connection to be torn—I was injured. 

Eventually my heart started yelling and screaming in resistance, "Not again! This is too painful!" 
My heart made clear that I couldn't connect deeply again unless it was safe. 
I knew what safe meant: permanent. 

I was made for consistent, intimate family that is physically and emotionally present. 
In time this recognition of my need for lifelong, lived-in human family as a celibate person led to the formation of the Nashville Family of Brothers. 

We’re an ecumenically Christian monastery building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness. 
We’re still a part of our local churches. 
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood. 
We’re still connected to parents and their kids. 
And 4 of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family 
as we discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.

And I don't think my need for this kind of family is unique. 
I think God has made all of you for stable, intimate human family that embodies the mystery of God's love by imitating the permanent, faithful nature of the love in God's family. 

But finding lifelong, lived-in human family is difficult. 
And we can’t wait for our pastors to incubate intentional Christian communities in our churches. 

So go find or make the family you need. 

And know that the real options available to you among biological family, 
nuclear families at your church, 
and intentional Christian communities will probably appear far from ideal, 
but I’m confident something is better than nothing. 

You can learn to cherish the imperfections of your family if you ask God for the grace to do so. I have. 

You may need to change jobs or cities for the hope of a family. 
People have done crazier things for their marriages. 

God might even be calling some of you to do the difficult work of building intentional Christian community where others can find family.

Who is your family? And if you don’t have one, what would it take to start building that?
5. Find your family

[Notes]
What about you? Who is your family?
And if you don’t have one, what would it take to start building that?

Mourn
Learn to discern
Deepen theology
Identify kingdom work
Find your family
Own our celibacy

[Notes]
So mourning my involuntary celibacy, 
growing a capacity for and practicing general Christian discernment, 
deepening my theological appreciation of vocational singleness, 
figuring out the kingdom work I’m called to, 
and building the lifelong, lived-in family I needed have 
all helped me intentionally discern my celibacy and actually make it good. 

Can I challenge you guys to do the same? 
I’m not special. 
Any of you—empowered by the Holy Spirit—could do all of these for yourself as well.

Public commitments help us celebrate our vocation and reassure us that God is blessing our singleness
Start with short-term commitments, but eventually consider lifetime
6. Lastly, commit

[Notes]
And last, I made gradual commitments, in public.

In my journey toward embracing vocational singleness, 
I recognized the importance of making intentional, public commitments to solidify my dedication.

At first I started with one-year and three-year commitments to vocational singleness, 
believing that these incremental steps would provide clarity and confidence in my calling. 

As my conviction deepened, I felt led to make a lifetime commitment.
I made a pretty big deal of my lifetime commitments. 
To be honest, I think it was the second most important day of my life (after my baptism)! 
That was worth celebrating in a huge way. 

There was formal wear and flowers. Organ and brass quintet music. A processional followed by formal vows. 
I celebrated with a bachelor party, rehearsal dinner, and a formal reception with jazz, cake and toasts. 
After those celebrations, I went on a commitments vacation in Europe. 

Altogether, these moments helped me believe that my vocation to kingdom singleness is just as beautiful, 
just as worth celebrating, and just as valuable as a marriage.  

I needed a ceremony—a big embodied moment—to not only convince my mind, but to reassure my body and soul that God was really doing something. 
The celebrations helped me trust that God was really giving me the full gift of vocational singleness to thrive in my vocation.
They helped me believe that God had given me an irrevocable call to fully commit myself to the undivided attention that vocational singleness can offer my kingdom work.

I encourage single Christians to consider embracing vocational singleness with similar intentionality. 
Starting with short-term commitments could help some of you enjoy that freedom from having to reassess your celibacy every day 
without having to take the intimidating step of making lifetime commitments.

Over time, as confidence in this vocation grows, making a public, lifetime commitment can be a profound and affirming step. 
Celebrating these commitments not only honors a single Christian's dedication 
but also highlights the equal worth and beauty of vocational singleness within the broader Christian community.

What if we treated celibacy as something worth celebrating? What if we reclaimed it as a life fully given to God?
6. Lastly, commit

[Notes]
What if we treated celibacy as something worth celebrating? What if we reclaimed it as a life fully given to God?
Webinar Key Questions

What are the dangers of involuntary singleness?
Why do Christians resist celibacy?
How does the Enemy use our resistance against us?
What solution should churches be offering?
How can we own our celibacy through discernment?

[Notes]
Let me close with an encouragement.

It’s true, others have made celibacy impractical in many of our churches. 
And resisting our celibacy with self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing makes sense. 
But I beg you not to let the Enemy use those to deceive you to self-destruction. 

Instead, discern-to-embrace your celibacy. 
Mourn, discover a deeper appreciation for vocational singleness, 
grow your capacity for general Christian discernment, 
ask friends and family to pray for you, 
explore what kingdom work your celibacy might empower, 
take practical steps to find family, 
give yourself time, 
and eventually own your celibacy with public commitment and celebration. 

We are not doomed. 
We do not have to settle for surviving.  
We can thrive together in our celibacy. 

And that starts now—with a choice. 
You are not alone in this. 
Let’s embrace this calling together.

What’s one thing from today that resonated with you?
What’s your next step?
Thrive in celibacy

[Notes]
I want you to take a moment and personally consider:
what’s one thing from today that resonated with you?
What’s your next step?
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
QUESTIONS?

