
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

webinars
equip



[Notes]
Welcome to our Equip Webinar this month

I will send full notes from today’s webinar after we finish, so don’t worry if you miss something but didn’t get a chance to write it down

And finally, I will be recording the webinar to add this content to Equip’s Digital Leaders Course
But I will turn off recording before we get to Q&A at the end

ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 300 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Should Christians attend gay weddings?


[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today:
should Christians attend gay weddings?
Webinar Focus

The stakes
Christian marriages and weddings
Non-Christians marriages and weddings
Consistency & relationship
What Pieter does
Other challenging moments

[Notes]
to explore that question, we’re going to talk about the stakes when a Christian is invited
we’ll define what Christian marriage is and what it means to be part of a Christian wedding
then in contrast, we’ll explore what’s different about non-Christian marriages and weddings
I’ll offer some key principles for discerning whether to attend
I’ll share how I answer our key question

and then I’ll close with a few comments about other challenging moments,
like engagement announcements, post-wedding social media posts, anniversaries, baby showers, and baptisms
the stakes


[Notes]
so first, let’s talk about the stakes
we’re getting into the wedding season, right?
this summer and fall, some of you will be invited to weddings
and the stakes are high

some of the weddings you’ll be invited to will be between Christians and be deeply sacramental
others will be the complete opposite
the couple might be two people of the opposite sex
or two people of the same sex

particularly if you get invited to a gay wedding,
things feel like they get complicated, quickly, right?

if you’re getting invited to the wedding, it’s probably a wedding between people you love
first a foremost, you don’t want to hurt someone you love
on a day they’ll consider to be one of the most important days of their life

at the same time, there’s concerns about what it would mean if you attended
to the couple
to those who are in attendance or see the photos later
and to God

what would your attendance or choosing not to attend communicate to the gay couple
about God’s wisdom
about God’s love for them
about your love for them

what would your attendance or choosing not to attend communicate to people at the wedding and who see the wedding photos
or hear that you declined
you risk becoming the target of heavy criticism
from either more culturally progressive people accusing you of homophobia
or from more culturally conservative people accusing you of being complicit in sin

and then there’s God
what would your attendance or choosing not to attend mean to Him?
what’s the best way to be faithful to a God who has invited us to love the world with grace and truth?
what should you do to make sure you feel like whatever decision you made was made with integrity?

clearly, the stakes are high
for many, this season of invitations is fraught with landmines
and we feel frozen, often because we don’t know what questions to ask
or what ideas to consider
when discerning

well, hopefully this webinar will offer you some of those questions and ideas
ultimately, I can’t give you a 5-step process for quickly, cleanly, and easily getting the right answer for you
but we can bring clarity to your discernment process
Christian marriage


[Notes]
to do that, we first need to define what Christian marriage is
and what it means to God and to Christians historically to be part of a Christian wedding

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raise children for the sake of the kingdom.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raise children for the sake of the kingdom.


Christian marriage…

Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage

And honestly, I think the difference between Christian marriage and non-Christian natural order marriage is much greater than the difference between non-Christian natural order marriage and marriages that are neither Christian nor natural order marriage
Or the put it more simply, I think the difference between a truly Christian marriage and a non-Christian opposite-sex marriage is MUCH greater than the difference between a same-sex vs opposite-sex non-Christian marriage
The difference in terms of how far the marriage is from God’s best
And how big the blessing is that God provides
Is so different that they’re not even that comparable

there’s truly Christian marriage
and then there’s everything else



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…

Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.

In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce,
giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention.

Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence,
but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception,
and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception.

Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce.

Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage
or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine
(1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man…

God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man

God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman
and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage.

In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband.

Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raise children for the sake of the kingdom.

God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raise children for the sake of the kingdom.

I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)


Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, & life-giving to remind us that
God will never abandon us
there is beautiful differentness in the Trinity & between Jesus+Church
the Trinity & Jesus+Church are life-sustaining
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
in particular, it's important that Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, and life-giving.

Christian marriages are supposed to be for a lifetime. There are very few grounds for Biblical divorce and remarriage.
This faithfulness in Christian marriage displays the gospel because it remind us that God will never abandon us.

Christian marriages are supposed to be complimentary. The complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically in Christian marriage
displays the gospel by pointing back to the different-ness in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

And Christian marriage are supposed to be a space for raising children,
pointing us back to the life-giving nature of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church.

When a Christian attends a Christian wedding, they’re responsibility for testing and affirming whether a truly Christian wedding, that testifies accurately to God’s love, is taking place
Christian Weddings

[Notes]
in light of this, what has it meant, historically, for Christians to attend a Christian wedding?

well, weddings were usually at a person’s local church
the attendees were everyone from a person’s local church
the priest led the ceremony
but there was also a liturgy that heavily involved the local church
everyone in attendance was invited to affirm that God was indeed joining the couple in Christian marriage
and everyone in attendance committed to helping the marriage thrive

so when a Christian attended a wedding at their local church
they were just celebrating
or watching
they had a responsibility to test whether a Christian wedding was truly taking place
or whether that was untrue
and this mattered because your attendance and affirmation signaled to Christians and non-Christians alike that this was going to be a marriage that they could look to to see a glimpse of the gospel
that you could look to this Christian marriage to learn something about God’s love
the gospel was at stake if the couple, for one reason or another, was already set up tell a lie about God’s love
this was a big responsibility
it really mattered if Christians attended a wedding that claimed to be joining a couple in a Christian marriage

Because God enters into, joins, and sustains Christian marriage in such a powerfully particular way,
Christians have historically felt compelled to ensure that they can confidently confirm God's work at Christian weddings
non-Christian marriage


[Notes]
God seems to have defined pretty narrowly what Christian marriage (the kind of marriage God uniquely joins and sustains) is:
a lifetime union between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

Most marriages are “Christian marriages”
same-sex unions
two non-Christians of the opposite sex
a Christians and a non-Christian of the opposite sex
two opposite-sex Christians who aren’t open to raising children for the kingdom
two opposite-sex Christians who aren’t serious about a truly lifetime vocation
non-Christian Weddings

[Notes]
God seems to have defined pretty narrowly what Christian marriage (the kind of marriage God uniquely joins and sustains) is:
which means that there are lots of marriages that aren’t Christian marriages in the fullest ways
yes, same-sex unions fall short of that standard
but so do two non-Christians of the opposite sex
a Christian and a non-Christian of the opposite sex
two opposite-sex Christians who don't take the biblical purposes of Christian marriage seriously, including an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom
or two opposite-sex Christians who don't take seriously what the Bible has to say about divorce/remarriage and Christian marriage being a truly lifetime vocation

Many civil unions fall short of that standard

plus, at non-Christian marriages you’re not being asked to affirm that God is blessing the marriage
often you’re not asked to do anything at all other than take pictures, clap, drink, eat, and dance
the wedding could be between two non-Christians who get married in a barn, without a priest, and without saying anything about God

so when you’re invited to something that isn’t claiming to be a Christian marriage in the fullest way, you’re being asked to do something fundamentally different
you have a fundamentally different, and smaller, responsibility
There's a big difference between two non-Christians of the same sex getting married in a field without invoking God…

…versus two self-professed Christians of the same sex quoting Scripture and using Christian marriage liturgy in a church
non-Christian Weddings

[Notes]
there's a big difference between two non-Christians of the same sex getting married in a field without invoking God
versus two self-professed Christians of the same sex quoting Scripture and using Christian marriage liturgy in a church
principles for discernment


[Notes]
in light of that range of responsibility you might have
how do you decide how to respond to an invitation to a gay wedding
or any wedding?
Treat sacred what God treats sacred
Discernment principles

[Notes]
Well first, I encourage you to treat sacred what God treats sacred
particularly if the couple is claiming that God is joining, blessing, and sustaining them in sacramental Christian marriage
but you’re convinced that God will not be doing that
because God is very specific about what marriages He blesses in that fullest way

If you’re convinced that God isn’t blessing the marriage as a Christian marriage
then we have a responsibility not to misleadingly bless the marriage as a Christian marriage either



Prioritize maintaining the relationship, particularly with non-Christians
Discernment principles

[Notes]
At the same time…
each time a Christian gets invited to a wedding that falls short of God's highest standards,
we've got to humbly weigh how our presence might be misinterpreted versus how our absence might affect our relationship with the betrothed
And how that might affect our potential to have a gospel impact on the couple in the future

you might choose to err on the side of maintaining relationship, particularly if they aren't believers

if you are convicted that you can’t attend
I’d encourage you to make an effort to carefully explain your decision in a way that honors and cares for the couple.
go to great lengths to reassure the couple of your love for them, that you’re not judging them, and that you need to respect your own convictions.

But most importantly, be consistent.
Discernment principles

[Notes]
But even more importantly, we've got to be consistent.

If many opposite sex weddings fall just as short of God's vision for Christian marriage, then you need to have the same answer to those invitations
Wherever you land in terms of balancing integrity versus maintaining relationship, be consistent.
Treat every wedding that falls short of God’s vision the same.

IF you're invited to the wedding of
- two non-Christians of the opposite sex,
- a Christian and a non-Christian of the opposite sex,
- two opposite-sex Christians who don't take the biblical purposes of Christian marriage seriously, or
- two opposite-sex Christians who don't take seriously what the Bible has to say about divorce/remarriage,
THEN I challenge you to respond the same ways you do to a same-sex couple whose union falls short of God's design for Christian marriage.

Consistency is key.
If you care about people taking all of God's wisdom for Christian marriage seriously, then apply that to all weddings. 

Because when you don't—when you refuse to attend gay weddings
but attend straight weddings that fall short of God's vision for Christian marriage yet claim to be joined by God
—your motivations aren't concern for God's wisdom.
Treat sacred what God treats sacred
Prioritize maintaining the relationship, particularly with non-Christians
Most importantly, be consistent
Discernment principles

[Notes]
so, each time you’re invited to a wedding
remember these three principles

Treat sacred what God treats sacred
Prioritize maintaining the relationship, particularly with non-Christians
Most importantly, be consistent

be careful to make your decision after
considering each
bringing them each before the Lord in prayer
and discerning them with trusted mentors and peers
how I respond


[Notes]
how do I respond when I get invited to weddings?
how do I generally weight these three principles?

for me, it’s helpful to imagine a spectrum of possibilities and responsibilities
on one end, I can imagine some future time when I’m an ordained priest
and I’m invited by two Christians of the same sex
to administer a wedding with traditional Christian marriage liturgy in a church
I couldn’t do that

on the other end, I can imagine being invited to the same-sex wedding of two friends who aren’t Christians
at a wedding in a field without any mention of God
I could probably attend that

and then there’s everything in between

I generally err on the side of maintaining relationship, particularly if they aren't believers

where as, if they are claiming that God is joining and sustaining them in Christian marriage
but I believe God isn’t
then I would likely not attend
but again, make every effort to carefully explain my decision in a way that honors and cares for the couple.
I’d go to great lengths to reassure the couple of my love for them, that I’m not judging them, and that I need to respect mu own convictions.

but to be clear, I’d have the same response to an opposite-sex wedding that claims to be a truly Christian marriage
but for one reason or another, I’m convinced that it isn’t
I'd also hesitate to attend those weddings.

tell story about ben groner
opposite sex
marginally Christian + secular Jewish
invited to bachelor party and wedding
message for clarity about whether they felt like the God of the Bible was joining them in marriage
recognized the heaviness of my question and fear of hurting or offending
clarified that they didn’t see it as the God of the Bible joining them
he appreciated my sensitivity but also integrity, knowing what I do for a living
still invited to the bachelor party and wedding
attended both joyfully
other challenging moments


[Notes]
okay, we’ve talked a lot of weddings
but what about those other challenging moments
often related to weddings and marriages

like engagement announcements, post-wedding social media posts, anniversaries, baby showers, and baptisms

for some people it doesn’t mean much to like or heart an engagement announcement or post-wedding photo post
even if you don’t think God is joining and blessing them in the fullest way
for others, they feel a sense of conflict, but still feel like the absence of their affirmation will cause problems
if that’s the case, perhaps you can find something you can comment that you can fully get behind
like, “wow, you both look so amazing! it warms my heart to see your big smiles”
or whatever fits for you

when it comes to attending baby showers and baptisms
I’d argue that those are less about the wedding or marriage
and more about supporting their effort of being parents
I don’t personally feel as much conflict there
but for those who do, perhaps you could ask for more information about what these events mean to the couple
and then go from there
more on consistency


[Notes]
I want to leave you with a final comment about consistency
particularly for Christians who feel strongly about integrity
and the need to treat sacred what God treats sacred

If we are genuinely concerned about the sanctity of marriage, can I make a suggestion?

We are right to believe that Christian marriages are meant to display God’s mysterious love in a particular way.
When Christian marriages faithfully lean into God’s design by embodying the complementary, lifelong, life-giving, intimate, hospitable and sacrificial nature of God’s love,
faithful Christian marriages make it easier for all of us to believe that God exists and loves us.

We are right to be concerned when marriages fall short of God’s design,
falsely testifying about the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the church.

But may I encourage us to first focus on shoring up the sanctity of marriage in our own churches?
Too many opposite-sex marriages between Bible-believing, evangelical Christians in our churches are failing to reflect the life-giving and lifetime nature of God’s love.

Instead, many marriages in our churches are deciding only to raise children if and when they want to,
without discerning how God might be calling them to serve the kingdom with their marriage.
They fail to humbly approach God with a willingness to sacrificially rear children,
ignoring biblical teaching that Christian marriages should be open to raising kids for the sake of the kingdom.
Furthermore, those in Christian marriages are getting divorced at the same rates as non-Christians,
ignoring the Bible’s prohibitions against divorce and remarriage in most cases.

Collectively, this profaning of the sanctity of marriage tells a lie about God’s love.
These violations suggest that God isn’t really willing to suffer so that His children would have life and that God’s love can’t be trusted.
They tell a lie that if God doesn’t feel like loving us anymore or we’ve made too many mistakes, He will move on and find another.

Before we post on Facebook about how so-called same-sex marriages are not marriages in God’s eyes,
before we donate to organizations or politicians promising to reverse the Respect for Marriage Act, for example,
and before we pour energy and prayers into resisting the LGBTQ+ movement,
could I encourage us to first focus on our local churches?

Gather with couples in your church, and study what the Scriptures and the historic church actually have to say about Christian marriage.
Recommit to the complementary, lifelong, life-giving, intimate, hospitable and sacrificial nature of Christian marriage.
Promise to hold each other accountable to God’s design for Christian marriage.

Have compassionate but direct conversations with straight Christians whose marriages are falling short of God’s intentions.
Pray for each other’s marriages and offer each other counsel, so that long before divorce feels like the least bad option, you can strengthen each other’s marriages.
Commit to doing whatever you can to keep each other from getting divorced.

If some feel convicted to raise more children for the sake of the kingdom, either through bearing children or adoption, be the hands and feet that hold up their family.
Particularly if they don’t have extended biological family nearby, offer to babysit and provide meals.
Offer them company when they go grocery shopping, clean their house or do their laundry.

In short, if we have respect for Christian marriage and want to protect Christian marriage,
let’s start with the marriages in our own church families.

Then perhaps, if Christians are more faithfully living out Christian marriage,
those who don’t yet know Jesus would be compelled by the love witnessed in our marriages to believe that a God exists and loves them.
Perhaps they’d long for relationship with that God and trust that His gifts and wisdom are better than any government certificate.
QUESTIONS?

