God’s Love & Wisdom for Gay People

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is a leading coaching and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where LGBT+ Christians thrive according to historic sexual ethics.

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350+ trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
PIETER
Equip is a leading coaching and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where LGBT+ Christians thrive according to historic sexual ethics. 

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350+ trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a historic sexual ethic
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and diaconate explorer in the Anglican Church in North America
 
I’m a founding member of am intentional Christian community for men committed to vocational singleness
called the Nashville Family of Brothers
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University,
studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

When I use the word gay to describe myself or others,
I’m merely using that word to refer to the fact that
people experience same-sex attraction, nothing more.
I’m not using it to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or relationship status, either one way or another.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what we mean when we use the words we do today.

Second, a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me horrible stereotypes of gay people
so I didn’t think I belonged among gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic

In terms of my personal life
while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.

but I knew I didn’t a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
So I asked my pastor at the time, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus four of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
I hope it shows that I’m richly blessed by God and deeply grateful
with the help of the Holy Spirit, I’ve been able to find a way to walk out historic sexual ethics
in a way that is truly life-giving and worth it for me!
We love gay people, and we’re convinced God has something better to offer gay people than gay marriage.

How do we make sure our churches actually become places of thriving?
God’s Love & Wisdom

[Notes]
there’s also a part of my story that I think a lot of you could resonate with

My parents were married in an Episcopal Church
I was baptized and confirmed in that church
I spent the first twelve years of my life going to that church
My father served on the vestry in that church
Then the Episcopal Church ordained a bishop persisting in unrepentant same-sex romantic and sexual activity, and my family left.

At the same time, as the loudest voices on different extremes argued about God’s love for gay people,
I was slowly becoming aware of my own same-sex attractions, and I was terrified.
I was terrified that progressive voices on one extreme would push me to disobey God’s teachings,
and I was terrified that traditional voices on another extreme would add to the deep shame I already felt.

Interestingly, our family actually went to a conservative Methodist church after that,
which in many ways was a blessing to me

The congregations that would become the ACNA endured decades of TEC slowly (or not so slowly) abandoning orthodoxy on many fronts,
but sexual ethics served as the breaking point.
At least in the eyes of this cradle Anglican,
a belief that God had something better to offer gay people than gay marriage was at the very center of the ACNA’s origins
So fulfilling our commitment to offering gay people a viable path for thriving according to God’s wisdom is central to our credibility
To put it simply, many people have been waiting to see if we meant what we promised or if we just didn’t like gay people

Does that seem familiar?

My hunch is, there’s gay people in your life that you love deeply
you’re not where you are because you hate gay people
you’re here because you love gay people
and like me, you’re convinced that God has something better to offer gay people than gay marriage
so what does God want to offer?
and how can we, the next generation of leaders in our denominations,
make sure we’re become known for more than just talk
but we actually embody historic sexual ethics God’s wisdom in our churches
in ways that lead to undeniable flourishing in the lives of gay Christians following God’s wisdom in our churches
God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
to answer that question, we’re going to explore three things today

first, I want to share with you how we can make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion

second, I want to cast a vision for becoming churches where gay Christians thrive according to God’s wisdom

and then I want to conclude with some exploration of how we can respond to some of the toughest questions
that come up in discipleship with empathy and care
what do I believe?

[Notes]
so first, how can we make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion?

I want to model that by sharing with you what I understand to be God’s wisdom for my life
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons

To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch

For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions

For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a historic sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different.

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems

Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways
that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity

What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible

Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions
or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture,
but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions:
no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out

How does that apply to broken sexuality?
I believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God
and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a revisionist sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
PIETER

In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a lifetime committed singleness
where one gives up romance and marriage and sex
to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out

And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage
as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman
for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question,
“What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear:
vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
unfortunately, most of my gay Christian friends who have abandoned historic sexual ethics
for an ethic that condoned gay sex eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them have followed a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

So yeah, I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that historic sexual ethics is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, the gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a historic sexual ethic, too
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic are lonely,
struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon historic Christian sexual ethics because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic




God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
so how?

the solution

[Notes]
how can our churches becomes places where gay Christians thrive according to God’s wisdom?
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support
And look the other way when straight Christians
casually engage in romance
have sex outside of marriage
Suffer from near-ubiquitous pornography addiction
unthinkingly refuse an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage
and engage in unbiblical divorce/remarriage
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people
can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort

Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics,
but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.

They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.

But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.

Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.
Partnering with Equip
We offer coaching, tools, and support to help churches become places where everyone thrives according to God’s wisdom for our sexualities.

[Notes]
and that’s what Equip is all about
we have a decade of experience helping churches become communities of thriving
become churches where everyone thrives according to God’s wisdom for our sexualities
connect with me to see if Equip is a good fit for your church
God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
so we’ve explored how we can think compassionately about sexual ethics
and cast a vision for thriving in our churches
I want to wrap up our time together by addressing some of the toughest questions that come up in discipleship
the big questions

[Notes]
now unfortunately, we don’t have enough time to get through all of these questions:
the big questions
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Should I call myself gay? How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?
Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

[Notes]
questions like…

Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?
Should I call myself gay? How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?
Pastoral Care Question 1
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
there will be an opportunity for you to share your contact information with me afterward
and I can get you a copy of my notes with the answers to all of those questions

but let’s at least tackle the first one:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 1
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 1
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 1
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.
Partnering with Equip
equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
You can get my notes for that question and all of the questions I listed earlier at the QR code on the screen

also, at the link or QR code, you can give me your contact info to reach out to you about partnering with Equip

we’ve trained over 35,000 Christian leaders to better ministry to LGBT+ people according to historic sexual ethics
we’ve got over a decade of experience
and we’ve worked with churches just like yours
we’ve already worked with Mt Horeb here to train their staff
coach parents
setup a support group for parents of LGBT+ people
and we’re exploring next steps to equip leaders and parents at this church in deeper ways
so that they can engage their kids and their neighbors and their coworkers around some of the most challenging topics of our generation
and ultimately, so we can reach our kids and our community with the gospel

so if you’re curious whether Equip is a good fit for your church,
share your contact info with me
and I’ll reach out soon
I’m eager to hop on the phone and hear from you about your church and what you need
questions?
