


Intro





[Notes]
Welcome to “God’s Heart for His Daughters: How leaders & parents can better love LGB women”
I’m Pieter Valk, the Executive Director of EQUIP



Training Objectives



How can families and churches create spaces of belonging for LGB Christian women?
How are female & male sexuality different?
How do false theologies of femininity have a compounding effect on LGB women?
How can LGB Christian women meet their intimacy needs in healthy way?
How do shifting views re: women, morality, & sexual minorities affect LGB women?

[Notes]
I’m super excited for you to learn from my co-worker, Lindsey Snyder, how better minister to LGB women according to a traditional sexual ethic
How?
Here are the questions you’re going to explore:
How can families and churches create spaces of belonging for LGB Christian women?
How are female and male sexuality different?
How do false theologies of femininity have a compounding effect on LGB women?
How can LGB Christian women meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways?
How do shifting views inside and outside of churches about women, morality, and sexual minorities affect LGB women?

but before before you get started, I want to share a couple of things about EQUIP and some background for our conversation today







Our Mission



EQUIP is the leading coaching and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive for a lifetime according to a traditional sexual ethic.

[Notes]
In addition to equipping Christian leaders to better care for gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic and teach everyone about God's love and wisdom for gay people, EQUIP takes it a step further. We help churches prevent the wounds of the closet, raise the bar for everyone's sexual stewardship, and ensure that kingdom singles find lifelong family, not loneliness. We help everyone in your church thrive according to God's good and weighty wisdom. We do this through long-term partnerships that lead to long-lasting results, beginning with our signature Blueprint Process to identify a vision and strategy customized for your church.

This mission statement uses the word “gay” and the phrase “traditional sexual ethic”
What do we at EQUIP mean when we use those words?



Terminology



Gay
Lesbian
LGB
Queer
Sexual Minorities

[Notes]
When we use any of these terms today, we’re using them merely to refer to people who experience same-sex attraction
We aren’t communicating anything about a person’s theology or sexual practices
We know that wise Christians have different opinions about what sexuality identity language Christians should use
That’s an important conversation
But we’re not going to explore that today

You’ll also notice that I didn’t say LGBT
I didn’t include the T, which stands for transgender
We’re going to be focusing on sexual minorities today, although a lot of what Lindsey will teach about is universal to ministering to any Christian woman, including trans people




What do we believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different

[Notes]
Second, I was to be clear about EQUIP’s theological convictions providing the foundation for today’s training

We believe that experiencing same-sex attraction, people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay, is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So we don’t think that when God first imagined any of us and projected us being born into a perfect world, that God planned for us to experience same-sex attraction
But because we are born into a broken world, one of the ways some are affected by that brokenness is that they gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay cultural in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions.
What do we believe?

[Notes]
We also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond
The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask: If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So if order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
We believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others






God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.
What do we believe?

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as we understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, a traditional sexual ethic describes God’s wisdom for our sexual stewardship
When we say a traditional sexual ethic or a biblical sexual ethic, we’re referring to a belief that God’s best for most Christians is either
vocational singleness: a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work of undivided attention
Or Christian marriage: a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian man and one Christian women with an openness to raising children for the kingdom

the whole of Scripture consistently reveals God’s design for our lives. God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness. When it comes to what we do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear that there are two options for Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage
What does that mean for gay people?
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

Another way to clearly communicate what we believe is to contrast it with extremes on both sides. An organization called the Gay Christian Network popularized the terms Side A, Side B, and Side X to refer to three different theological camps in this conversation






Side A



God makes people gay
God blesses same-sex marriages in the same ways that He blesses opposite-sex marriages
Requires theological maneuvering or a belief that the Bible is not binding/prescriptive for a modern context 



Side B



Same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall
We do not choose who we are attracted to and there is no formula for changing one’s attractions
Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins
All Christians are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage
Christians can identify as gay in limited ways




Side X



Same-sex attracted Christians must reject their attractions and work toward change
Continuing to experience SSA is a sign of willful disobedience
Homosexuality is sinful
God intends for all people to marry someone of the opposite sex



Training Objectives



How can families and churches create spaces of belonging for LGB Christian women?
How are female & male sexuality different?
How do false theologies of femininity have a compounding effect on LGB women?
How can LGB Christian women meet their intimacy needs in healthy way?
How do shifting views re: women, morality, & sexual minorities affect LGB women?

[Notes]
Okay, enough chatter from me
Let’s get to why you’re here
To learn with my co-worker Lindsey Snyder
She’s spent the past 24 months at EQUIP researching, developing training content for, and leading topical trainings about ministering to LGB Christian women.
Lindsey graduated from Taylor University in 2014 with a BA in Film and Media Production and will soon complete her Master's in Social Work.






