
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

webinars
equip



[Notes]
Welcome to our Equip Webinar this month

I will send full notes from today’s webinar after we finish, so don’t worry if you miss something but didn’t get a chance to write it down

And finally, I will be recording the webinar to add this content to Equip’s Digital Leaders Course
But I will turn off recording before we get to Q&A at the end

ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 350 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 350 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (lifetime opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Jesus & the Trans Political Debate


[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today:
Church potluck and family table conversations increasingly include the latest cable news story about
a trans athletes competing against female-bodied people
or a drag storytime for kids at a local public library
or about a state legislature bill banning trans people from using the bathroom of their gender identity
or schools withholding information from parents that kids are sharing with school counselors about gender identity questions

The US Supreme Court is preparing to hear its first trans case in 2025, deliberating whether states can prohibit minors from hormonal and surgical transition
It feels like cultural conversation about trans people might be reaching its pinnacle in the coming year

But this isn't just political for many of us in the Church
it's personal
some of us are trying to faithfully navigate robust gender incongruence
or we have siblings
or classmates
or kids
or grandkis
or coworkers
who are trans in one way or another

Christians these days find it difficult to avoid political arguments about trans topics
or theological or personal conversations with people we care about in our lives about trans topics
maybe there's a trans person in your life or a cis-gendered ally who disagrees with you deeply about trans topics

even if we'd prefer to avoid conversation about trans topics if we could, we know we can't
we yearn for a way to engage in dialogue in a way that we're not embarrassed of what we're saying
or afraid to be bulldozed
and in a way that communicates our love to other people, including trans people
in a way that shows them more of Jesus
both Christ's love, and his wisdom, for trans people

sometimes, the best way to prepare for the future is to learn from the past
back in the 2000s and 2010s when a similar but different cultural conversation about same-sex marriage took place
Christian engagement had some successes and some failures

what if we learned from our mistakes in that cultural conversation
and prepared ourselves for upcoming conversation to reflect Christ's love and wisdom for trans people, 
including how to maintain relationship with relatives and friends who passionately disagree
without compromising on the teachings or empathy of Jesus
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions

[Notes]
to pursue that today, we’ll explore the following:
how can we think theologically about gender ethics?
what can we learn from Christian participation in the gay marriage debate?
how can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
what might biblical, compassionate care for trans people look like?
how can we maintain relationship while maintaining our convictions?
Terminology

gender incongruence - an acute sense that one’s gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person’s biological sex

trans - a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence.

[Notes]
a quick note about terminology:
for this conversation, I’ll use the term “gender incongruence”
to refer to an acute sense that one’s gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person’s biological sex.
I’ll use the term “trans”
as a a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence.
For a deeper dive on vocabulary/labels, check out the article on Equip’s website about trans vocab and pronoun use
We’ll talk more about pronouns later
And I don’t pretend to have the perfect phrases or definitions
I just want to be clear about what I mean when I use these words
thinking theologically


[Notes]
so first, how can we think theologically about gender ethics?


Trans people are image-bearers, too.
God values them greatly.
We, the Church, must learn to better love those God loves.
Eventually, we’ll need to share about God’s love and wisdom with nuance.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
This webinar isn’t about theology.
But I want to be transparent with you about what we at Equip believe about gender ethics
And what’s informing the suggestions I’m gonna offer later for Christian engagement in cultural conversations about trans topcics

I want to be clear:Trans people are image-bearers, too.
God values them greatly.
We, the Church, must learn to better love those God loves.

I’ve consistently posted about the need to prioritize relationship with trans people, 
build trust, address any mental health challenges unrelated to gender incongruence, 
and patiently wait for the Holy Spirit to move.

But eventually, conversation gets to theological questions.
Even more often, cisgender straight Christians press me to answer the question,
“Is transition permissible for Christians navigating gender incongruence?”

I don't want to answer this question
for the same reasons that I don't want to respond when people ask,
"Well, Pieter, do you think gay sex is a sin?"

There are so many more important questions when it comes to embodying God's love for gay and trans people.
There are so many hours of friendship and trust that must be earned before those of us who aren't trans or aren't gay have credibility to ask that question.

And yet, eventually, in some friendships and in some discipleship relationships, this question is asked.
And it matters that we respond with God's love AND wisdom.

In a few words, what are Equip’s convictions on biblical gender ethics?

There’s a biblical pattern of condemning genital alteration, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, and the elimination of gender difference. The Bible makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family. 
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
There is a biblical pattern of condemning genital alteration (Deuteronomy 22:5 and Deuteronomy 23:1), 
cross-dressing as part of cult practices (1 Corinthians 11:2-16), 
and the elimination of gender difference (1 Corinthians 11:2-16). 

The Bible makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family (Isaiah 56:1-5, Acts 8:25-39).

The Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes. The authors of Scripture were aware of trans people.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
The Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible
break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes
(Psalm 51:10-11, Micah 6:8, I Samuel 18:1-3, Proverbs 31, Judges 4:4, Acts 16:14, Luke 7:47,50).

The authors of Scripture were aware of trans people.

God first intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women (Genesis 1-3). The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
God first intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women (Genesis 1-3).
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.

Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.

Everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and genders. Cultural concepts of gender are broken, including arbitrarily assigning preferences to a gender.
God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest (cultural norms for gender and gender expression) to us.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
Everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders.
Cultural concepts of gender, including arbitrarily assigning preference to one gender or another, are broken.

God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity.
He left the rest (cultural norms for gender and gender expression) to us.

Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown. God didn’t intend gender incongruence. No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture,
but specifics are unknown. 

God didn’t intend gender incongruence. 

No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. 

Gender incongruence is a brokenness. 

Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.


While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.
There is no evidence to clearly support the theory that there is a brain-sex/body-sex difference that leads to gender incongruence.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time,
there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

There is no evidence to clearly support the theory that there is a brain-sex/body-sex difference that leads to gender incongruence.


Hormonal/surgical transition has not been scientifically demonstrated to reliably reduce depression/suicidality.
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended  but their gender experience is broken.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
Hormonal/surgical transition has not been scientifically demonstrated to reliably reduce depression/suicidality.

When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, 
we know that their biological sex is as God intended  but their gender experience is broken.


Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
Equip on Gender Ethics

[Notes]
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. 
Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.

For a deeper exploration of the biblical passages relevant to gender ethics and how to employ those to answer key theological questions, 
check out Equip’s Gender Incongruence Course at https://equipyourcommunity.org/gendercourse/.
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions

[Notes]
so now that we’ve built a little bit of a theological foundation

let’s explore what we can learn from Christian participation in the gay marriage debate
christians & the marriage debate


[Notes]
to put it simply
I think we missed opportunities to respond to the American cultural gay marriage debate with Christ's love and wisdom,
leading to a negative perception of the Church that continues to be the #1 barrier to the gospel for gay and straight non-Christians
let’s dig into that

“Negative personal experiences” with Christians #1 reason why gay people left the faith
76% of gay people who left were open to returning
92% wouldn’t require church theology change
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
Andrew Marin's Us Versus Us describes the results of
"the largest ever scientific survey on the religious history, practices, and beliefs of the LCBT community". 

That survey found that "negative personal experiences" with Christians/churches was the #1 reason why LGBT+ people left the faith. 

At the same time, 76% of LGBT+ people who had left the faith were open to returning, 
and 92% of those would not require a church to change their views in order to return. 

Common “negative personal experiences”:
pray-the-gay-away experiences
double standard of sexual stewardship 
pain of years in the closet
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
When Marin explores common themes among those negative personal experiences, 
the most common were
painful pray-the-gay-away experiences, 
the sense of a double standard of sexual stewardship, 
and the difficulty of spending years in the closet.

What Christians in 2000s said:
homophobic slurs
“gay sex worse than opposite-sex sexual sin”
(said/did nothing to make celibacy livable)
“stay in the closet”
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
In the 2000's, Christians were frequently witnessed using homophobic slurs, 
claiming that people choose to be gay, 
arguing that gay sex was a more heinous sin than opposite-sex sexual sin, 
ignoring the inviability of lifelong singleness, 
and continuing to discourage same-sex attracted teens from sharing about their experience.

What if instead, we had said:
“We know people don't choose who they're attracted to. And we know that pray-the-gay-away is a lie that's led millions of gay people to suicide or loss of faith. We don't think God intended anyone to experience same-sex attraction, but it's also not their fault…”
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
What if instead, they had heard something like the following:
"We know people don't choose who they're attracted to.
And we know that pray-the-gay-away is a lie that's led millions of gay people to suicide or loss of faith.
We don't think God intended anyone to experience same-sex attraction, but it's also not their fault.

“…God isn't surprised. God still loves gay people deeply. Gay people are still made in God's image. God wants to invite gay people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, and He's calling all Christians to help same-sex attracted Christians enjoy God's best…”
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
God isn't surprised. God still loves gay people deeply. 
Gay people are still made in God's image. 
God wants to invite gay people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, 
and He's calling all Christians to help same-sex attracted Christians enjoy God's best.

“…Our churches need to be places where SSA Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet. Instead, our churches have got to become places where gay people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ. Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer SSA Christians support to resist temptation toward same-sex romantic or sexual activity…”
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
Our churches need to be places where SSA Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet. 
Instead, our churches have got to become places where gay people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ. 
Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer SSA Christians support to resist temptation toward same-sex romantic or sexual activity. 

“…But even more so, churches can help SSA Christians find life-giving connection in the context of community. God isn't condemning gay people to Hell or loneliness for the sake of holiness. He wants to offer gay people a spiritual family of brothers and sisters in Christ where they can enjoy belonging for a lifetime."
Gay Marriage Debate…

[Notes]
But even more so, churches can help SSA Christians find life-giving connection in the context of community. 
God isn't condemning gay people to Hell or loneliness for the sake of holiness. 
He wants to offer gay people a spiritual family of brothers and sisters in Christ where they can enjoy belonging for a lifetime."
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions

[Notes]
so now that we’ve explored what we can learn from Christian participation in the gay marriage debate

let’s think about how Christians can think and speak differently about trans topics?
christians & the trans debate


[Notes]
In the future, we may look back on 2024/2025 as the year that our ham-fisted ways of engaging in cultural conversation about trans people
pushed people further away from Jesus.

Or, we could look back on 2024/2025 as the year that we learned from our misses in the cultural gay marriage debate, 
engaged in cultural conversation about trans people with both grace and truth, 
and made the gospel more accessible for future generations.

What Christians are saying today:
trans is fake / mental illness
trans are predators, tricking kids into trans, preying on women in bathrooms
medical transition is a political agenda to abuse children 
boys should be boys, girls should be girls
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
Today, what are non-Christians hearing from Christians about trans people?
Christians argue that being trans is either fake or a mental illness.
They argue that trans people are predators trying to trick kids into being trans and/or get in restrooms around vulnerable females.
They argue that hormones/surgery is a liberal agenda to abuse children and mutilate their genitals.
Boys should like the color blue, trucks, and football.
Girls should like the color pink, barbies, and ballet.

What in instead, Christians said:
“We believe people when they say that throughout their childhood and adolescence, they experienced this painful incongruence between their internal felt sense of their gender versus their biological sex. For years when they looked in the mirror, they felt alien in their own body…”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
What if instead they heard something like the following:
"We believe people when they say that throughout their childhood and adolescence,
they experienced this painful incongruence between their internal felt sense of their gender versus their biological sex. 
For years when they looked in the mirror, they felt alien in their own body. 


“…We're also disgusted by baseless, transphobic accusations that all trans people are predators and transphobic assertions that all trans people are mentally ill. While we don't think God intended for anyone to experience this gender incongruence, it isn't their fault. God isn't surprised, and God still loves trans people deeply. Trans people are still made in God's image…”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
We're also disgusted by baseless, transphobic accusations that all trans people are predators and transphobic assertions that all trans people are mentally ill. 
While we don't think God intended for anyone to experience this gender incongruence, it isn't their fault. 
God isn't surprised, and God still loves trans people deeply. Trans people are still made in God's image. 


“…God wants to invite trans people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, and He's calling all Christians to help trans Christians enjoy God's best. Our churches need to be places where trans Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet…”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
God wants to invite trans people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, 
and He's calling all Christians to help trans Christians enjoy God's best. 
Our churches need to be places where trans Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet. 


“…Instead, our churches have got to become places where trans people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ. Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer trans Christians support to resist the temptation to remake themselves in their own image using hormones or surgery…”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
Instead, our churches have got to become places where trans people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ. 
Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer trans Christians support to resist the temptation to remake themselves in their own image using hormones or surgery. 


“…But even more so, churches can push back against harmful cultural gender stereotypes and offer trans Christians space where men and women honor God with their bodies while expressing themselves authentically."
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
But even more so, churches can push back against harmful cultural gender stereotypes and offer trans Christians space where men and women honor God with their bodies while expressing themselves authentically."

Let me break that down:
“We believe people when they say that throughout their childhood and adolescence, they experienced this painful incongruence between their internal felt sense of their gender versus their biological sex.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
Now, I know that was probably overwhelming for some
Let me break that down

We believe people when they say that throughout their childhood and adolescence, they experienced this painful incongruence between their internal felt sense of their gender versus their biological sex.
- say we'll believe people
- does 80% resolve on it's own?
- do some post-puberty seem to try on trans for a season?
- sure
- but it does the gospel no good to lead with or emphasize those exceptions
- and for the many people who genuinely, robustly, unavoidably experience, doubting them only pushes them further from Jesus

Let me break that down:
“For years when they looked in the mirror, they felt alien in their own body.”
“We're also disgusted by baseless, transphobic accusations that all trans people are predators and transphobic assertions that all trans people are mentally ill.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
For years when they looked in the mirror, they felt alien in their own body.
- empathize with how challenging that experience would be
We're also disgusted by baseless, transphobic accusations that all trans people are predators and transphobic assertions that all trans people are mentally ill.
- they aren't all predators
- and while they're used to be a mental health diagnosis that merely experiencing that gender incongruence was a psychological defect
- that has since been removed
- recognize these things to earn some credibility, so that...

Let me break that down:
“While we don't think God intended for anyone to experience this gender incongruence, it isn't their fault.”
“God isn't surprised, and God still loves trans people deeply. Trans people are still made in God's image.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
While we don't think God intended for anyone to experience this gender incongruence, it isn't their fault.
- this'll be heard for them to hear if they disagree, but we've earn some credibility
- good to quickly follow up that it isn't their fault that they experience gender incongruence
God isn't surprised, and God still loves trans people deeply. Trans people are still made in God's image.
- Again, quick followup with more credibility building
- to be clear, we're using the word trans here to refer to people who call themselves trans or experience gender incongruence
- we aren't saying that God is pro medical transition
- many trans-identifying people never go through medical transition

Let me break that down:
“God wants to invite trans people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, and He's calling all Christians to help trans Christians enjoy God's best.”
“Our churches need to be places where trans Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
God wants to invite trans people to follow His wisdom so that they can experience fullness of life, and He's calling all Christians to help trans Christians enjoy God's best.
- We inching our way toward another challenging statement, but we're setting up that we're not judging
- It's about God's call to wisdom for the sake of their thriving!
- and we're recognizing that it's the responsibility of the Church, of Christians to support each other
Our churches need to be places where trans Christians don't have to be tortured by hiding in the closet.
- more credibility building
- and this is key--we don't want anyone to have to privately struggled with queerness
- that just makes them easy pickings for the Enemy
- we want them to bring whatever theyre dealing with out into the light, out into the open among their siblings in Christ so we can make sense of things together!

Let me break that down:
“Instead, our churches have got to become places where trans people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ.”
“Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer trans Christians support to resist the temptation to remake themselves in their own image using hormones or surgery.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
Instead, our churches have got to become places where trans people can share their story and be embraced by their siblings in Christ.
- more credibility building to the big statement...
Deeper community in the body of Christ can offer trans Christians support to resist the temptation to remake themselves in their own image using hormones or surgery.
- i know you eventually have to say it
- but say it with nuance
- after building lots of credibility
- and answer some of they why - because medical transition is a remaking oneself in their own image

Let me break that down:
“But even more so, churches can push back against harmful cultural gender stereotypes and offer trans Christians space where men and women honor God with their bodies while expressing themselves authentically.”
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
But even more so, churches can push back against harmful cultural gender stereotypes and offer trans Christians space where men and women honor God with their bodies while expressing themselves authentically.
- Quick sandwich of soft-hard-soft by recognizing the ways stereotypes that aren't found in scripture makes things worse for a lot of people

Will this convince everyone? No.

But there are some who are interested.
And those people need to be offered more than just extremes.
Jesus & the Trans Debate

[Notes]
Yes, there are those on the extreme that will always be outraged, no matter what answer is given.
But there are others who do care *how* we share about God's wisdom
and are willing to consider convictions they disagree with if they're offered in an intellectually honest and compassionate way.

Those on the extreme are so loud that we can be tricked into giving up on persuading anyone, 
but there are many who are still willing to be persuaded by grace and truth. 

It's difficult, but it's also the best way to push back against both transphobia and making an idol of self-invention.

Will there be people on the extreme Left and the extreme Right who will be deeply dissatisfied with this message?
Sure.
But it's unlikely those individuals were ever open to being persuaded. 
However, this message can be compelling for persuadable non-Christians in between these extremes. 
The Church can reach trans people who hesitate to embrace the LGBT+ cultural/political movement whole-hog, 
and the Church can reach the parents, siblings, friends, and coworkers of trans people.

More likely, many of the loudest Christians will say that being trans is fake or a mental illness, 
accuse trans people of being predators, and double-down on gender stereotypes. 
I'm worried that the ugliness of those words from some Christians might actually change the minds of some middle-road Americans
toward support for hormones/surgery for minors in opposition to what they perceive to be bigoted Christians.

Additionally, we know that progressive advocates will consistently reframe the conversation to be about protecting parent rights, stopping transphobia, and preventing teen suicide.

My fear is that unless moderate Christians upskill on how to speak about these topics with confidence and nuance, 
they will instead be timid or silent. 
And then non-Christians will assume that the loudest Christians saying the most offensive things speak for all Christians and for Jesus. 
We need for empathetic evangelical Christians equipped with grace and truth to be the loudest voice for Christ.
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions

[Notes]
so now that we’ve explored how Christians can think and speak differently about trans topics

let’s discuss what might biblical, compassionate care for trans people look like
caring for trans people


[Notes]
While these political debates are exhilarating and provocative, more important theological questions remain:
What were God’s intentions for biological sex and felt gender?
How did the Fall impact sex and gender?
How is God inviting Christians to steward enduring brokenness of various kinds, and how is God calling the Church to come alongside those believers carrying heavy burdens?

However, when a teen or adult chooses to share with you about their gender incongruence,
they’re often not ready for emotionally-loaded theological questions.
Many have already experienced painful rejection from believers,
leading to doubt about God’s love for them and the safety of their family or church.

They’re burdened by hesitation and fear,
and forced conversation about gender ethics will rarely be the most effective first step to minister to the individual well.

Parents and pastors know that they first need to build trust and rapport with the trans person that might eventually make space for heavier theological conversation.

As we patiently wait for the Holy Spirit to move (and perhaps convict),
how can they embody the compassion of Christ as they disciple Christians navigating gender incongruence?

Adopt a posture of empathy & compassion
Prioritize mental health challenges
Honor lack of choice & explore relief
Support acceptance of brokenness/suffering
Give them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage sharing their story
Practice name/pronoun hospitality
Caring for Trans People

[Notes]
Here’s seven suggestions for empathetic care for trans people while holding fast to biblical wisdom for gender ethics:

1. Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
2. Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
3. Honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
4. Support acceptance of brokenness and suffering
5. Give them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
6. Encourage them to share their stories and gather
7. Practice name and pronoun hospitality

Believe trans people when they share about their experience 
Remind trans Christians that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life
Patiently invest in relationships to earn their trust
1. Empathy & compassion

[Notes]
First, adopt a general posture of empathy and compassion

Different extremes in the debate about gender incongruence offer trans people equally unhelpful advice.
One side yells, “Just be normal!” 
They ignore the reality that trans people did not choose to experience gender incongruence 
and that there is no proven combination of counseling or spiritual practices to eliminate gender incongruence. 

Those on this extreme minimize the daily, painful reality of navigating enduring gender incongruence. 
They seem to forget that trans people are also made in the image of God, are greatly valued by Him, 
and that Christians should greatly value trans people as well.

Then the other side yells, “Transition or suicide!” 
They suggest that transition is an effective intervention to address mental illness (including suicidality) 
and that those who hesitate to bless hormonal and surgical transition are increasing suicidality.

I’d encourage you to resist both of those extremes. 

Instead, believe trans people when they share about their experience. 
Honor that faithfully stewarding gender incongruence will be costly and demands the support of trans people’s siblings in Christ.
Remind trans Christians that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life. 
While it is painfully difficult to live in a world (and a body) burdened by brokenness, brokenness will not be our experience forever; 
we have a hope and a future in Jesus for resurrected bodies and life when all will be made right.
Finally, take your time to build rapport with trans Christians you’re ministering to. 
Patiently invest in relationships to earn their trust. 
And don’t be surprised when walking together is at times difficult and complicated. 

41% of trans people attempt suicide
Address depression/suicidality with proven interventions:
Talk therapy with a counselor
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
Community of social support
2. Mental health focus

[Notes]
Second, prioritize addressing mental health challenges

Tragically, 41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population.
Trans suicide rates rose even higher for those who lost a job due to bias (55%), 
were harassed/bullied in school (51%), had low household income (61%), 
were the victim of physical assault (61%), or were the victim of sexual assault (65%). 

Additionally, scientific studies have found that trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, 
experiencing higher rates of borderline personality disorder, schizophrenia, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder compared to the general population. 

Before jumping into heavy theological questions or difficult discernment about transition, 
help them gather the resources they need to care for any co-occurring mental health conditions they’re experiencing.

Particularly if the individually is battling suicidality, the following interventions have been scientifically proven to most effectively reduce depression and suicidality:
1. Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
2. Regular exercise/physical activity
3. Anti-depressants
4. A broader community of social support

If a trans person you’re supporting is struggling with suicidality, help them find a therapist or counselor, 
go with them on walks, and help them maintain and deepen connections with safe friends and family.

(For a deeper exploration about the trans experience, suicidality, and whether medical transition effectively reduces depression/suicidality, 
check out this article: https://equipyourcommunity.org/does-trans-suicide-risk-justify-transition/)

Trans people don’t choose to experience gender incongruence
Support trans Christians as they consider morally neutral options
Help them resolve what they can and manage what they must.
3. Honor lack of choice

[Notes]
Third, honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Trans people don’t choose to experience gender incongruence, but they do have the responsibility to faithfully steward their brokenness. 

Support trans Christians as they consider morally neutral options in the range of social transition 
that might provide relief from the gender incongruence. 
Help them weigh each possibility and carefully step forward where the Lord leads. Help them resolve what they can and manage what they must.

All believers will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life
Hold space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb
4. Acceptance of suffering

[Notes]
Fourth, support their acceptance of some enduring brokenness and hardship

Even if a trans Christian you’re supporting takes some morally neutral steps to reduce their distress, 
they’ll likely continue to experience some level of persisting and painful gender incongruence. 
And while hormonal and surgical transition have not been shown to effectively reduce suicidality, 
trans Christians yearning for further relief will certainly be burdened by cultural messages that further transition will eliminate their distress.

Step into that space and encourage trans Christians you’re ministering to to resist further transition that is unlikely to provide the relief they desire, 
and instead invite them to accept some level of enduring brokenness.

Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life. 
Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness. 
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls!
Help trans Christians you’re ministering to explore what Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering and how they found a way to accept persisting brokenness. 

And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.
Some pain will be unavoidable.

Trans people can’t avoid using a name for themselves, using pronouns, going to the bathroom, wearing clothes, or speaking with a pitched voice.
There will be daily, unavoidable, and painful reminders for trans people of their gender incongruence.

Make space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb.
Reassure them that their feelings are valid and that their pain is real.
Promise them that you won’t leave their side, and then stay.

Resist over-prescribing what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are
Give trans Christians permission to express themselves in culturally atypical ways
5. Reject stereotypes

[Notes]
Fifth, give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes

American culture has arbitrarily attributed preferences and affinities to gender that have nothing inherently to do with gender.

While the core of a trans Christian’s distress is an internal sense that their biological sex and felt gender are incongruent, 
feeling forced to comply with arbitrary cultural expectations can multiply distress.

Help trans Christians reduce pain related to their gender by giving them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes.

Parents and pastors can join trans Christians by resisting over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are, 
while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.

Giving trans Christians (and any Christian) permission to express themselves in culturally atypical ways
may raise questions or concerns with siblings in Christ who are less aware of the arbitrary nature of gender stereotypes.
Pastors and parents can protect trans Christians from harassment for their preferences and affinities
by engaging with concerned believers, assuring them that rejection of cultural gender does not mean rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex or gender.

Cisgender Christians can learn from the courage and resiliency of trans Christians
Encourage trans Christians to gather with other trans Christians to find unique support and understanding
6. Encourage story sharing

[Notes]
Sixth, encourage them to share their stories

Trans Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved. 
They need to share their stories, and they need to see their siblings in Christ respond with curiosity and compassion. 

At the same time, our churches need to hear the stories of trans Christians who are faithfully stewarding their brokenness.
Cisgender Christians can learn from the courage and resiliency of trans Christians, 
and cisgender Christians can gain self-awareness about the ways cultural gender stereotypes haunt them by empathizing with trans Christians.

Pastors and parents also need to encourage trans Christians to gather with other trans Christians. 
Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding. 

Each of these opportunities for Christian fellowship can contribute to greater spiritual growth, 
discovering shared meaning in suffering, and enjoying healthy intimacy in a community of believers.

In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality
Earn credibility before challenging
For minors, respect parents’ wishes
7. Practice hospitality 

[Notes]
Seventh, practice name/pronoun hospitality

Given names and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of the pain and tension that is felt every day.

Identifying as trans or using alt pronouns can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence”
or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between).

In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to the identifiers, names, and pronouns that the individual uses, and then use those same words as an act of hospitality.

You might ask the individual what they mean when they use those words.
Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings, 
but instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language.

This is a simple but effective way to diffuse potential tension early in the relationship and open the door for future conversation.

For those using the word trans or alt pronouns or names to communicate that they are a fundamentally different kind of person
and to signal a rejection of God’s gift of their biological sex,
you might have a different kind of conversation.

If the person is someone you’ve had years of relationship with, you have demonstrated your care for them,
and they’ve invited you to disciple them through some of this stuff;
then you might push on them about the wisdom of them using those words.
Not because of the words themselves, but because of the intentions behind the words.

You might ultimately choose to continue to respect their pronoun and name request, 
but you also will have registered with them your perspective that those preferences might not be wisest.

When it comes to minors, I default to respecting the preferences of parents, particularly if they’re kids or younger teens.
Ultimately, discipleship is the parents' responsibility, and I’ll respect that.
If parents want me to honor a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that.
If parents want me to ignore a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that. 

If older teens are driving themselves to activities, consider respecting their request, unless you hear otherwise from parents.

After rapport building, praying for the Holy Spirit to move, and discerning an opening into deeper conversation…
Ready for theological conversation?

[Notes]
Continue building trust and trusting the Holy Spirit

After a long season of implementing these seven suggestions, continuing to build rapport,
and continuing to pray for the Holy Spirit to move,
you may discern an opening to enter into deeper conversation about theology and the ethics of transition.

For advice on how to think theologically about biological sex and felt gender, the impact of the Fall,
and how God is inviting Chrisitans to faithfully steward enduring brokenness,
check out Equip’s Gender Incongruence Course at https://equipyourcommunity.org/gendercourse/.
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions

[Notes]
so now that we’ve discussed what biblical, compassionate care for trans people can look like

let’s close with exploring how we can maintain relationship while maintaining our convictions
maintaining relationship


[Notes]
ive got five suggestions

Prioritize Love and Relationship
Seek to Understand, Not Just to Be Understood
Maintain Biblical Convictions with Humility
Set Boundaries When Necessary
Trust in the Holy Spirit’s Work
Caring for Trans People

[Notes]
Prioritize Love and Relationship
Seek to Understand, Not Just to Be Understood
Embrace Patience and Grace
Maintain Biblical Convictions with Humility
Set Boundaries When Necessary
Trust in the Holy Spirit’s Work

Lead with connection, be present, and communicate care
Avoid making love conditional on agreement or focusing too heavily on changing their mind
1. Prioritize relationship

[Notes]
Prioritize Love and Relationship

Christians are called to love their neighbors, including those who disagree with them on important issues.
Maintaining relationships with both Christians and non-Christians who hold differing views on trans issues requires focusing on shared humanity,
respecting their dignity, and showing the love of Christ, even when it’s hard.

Here’s some Practical Tips:

Lead with Connection: Find ways to connect on common ground, whether it’s shared interests, experiences, or other aspects of life.
Avoid making disagreements about trans issues the center of your relationship. This helps preserve the relationship in other areas.

Be Present: Consistently show up for people in their lives, whether that’s by being available for conversations,
attending events that matter to them, or offering help when needed.
Your presence and support build trust.

Communicate Care: Intentionally tell the person that your relationship with them matters more than your disagreements.
Say things like, “I really value our relationship, and even though we don’t see eye-to-eye on this, I’m committed to staying connected.”

What Not to Do: Avoid making love conditional on agreement. People need to feel that you value them even if they never change their view.
Avoid focusing too heavily on convincing them to change their mind every time you talk, as that can strain the relationship.

Ask open-ended questions, practice active listening, resist the urge to argue, and clarify instead of assuming
Avoid trap questions, interrupting them, or immediately counterpointing
2. Seek to understand

[Notes]
Seek to Understand, Not Just to Be Understood

Instead of starting with arguments or defense of beliefs, actively listen and seek to understand why someone holds their perspective on trans issues.
Genuine curiosity and empathy in conversations can soften disagreements and keep relationships intact, even when there’s no agreement.
This reflects Jesus’ call to humility in engaging with others.

Practical Tips:

Ask Open-Ended Questions: Instead of jumping in with your perspective, try asking,
“Can you help me understand what experiences have shaped your view on trans issues?”
This allows them to share their story, and it demonstrates that you care about their perspective.

Active Listening: When the other person speaks, don’t just wait for your turn to respond. 
Summarize their points back to them to ensure you understand and that they feel heard. 
For example, “It sounds like you feel passionate about trans rights because of a friend you care deeply about. Is that right?”

Resist the Urge to Argue: It’s tempting to immediately refute points you disagree with,
but instead, listen fully and give them space to finish before responding.
Sometimes, listening without immediately defending your view can diffuse tension.

Clarify, Don’t Assume: If something they say confuses or surprises you, ask for clarification rather than assuming their intent.
Say something like, “I’m not sure I understand what you mean by that. Could you explain a little more?”

What Not to Do: Avoid framing your questions in a way that feels like a trap or manipulation. Be genuinely curious, not combative.
Avoid interrupting to immediately correct or counter their points.

Be transparent about your convictions, admit what you don’t know, separate beliefs from people, and own your mistakes
Avoid shaming jargon or suggesting a monopoly of interpretation
3. Hold beliefs humbly

[Notes]
Maintain Biblical Convictions with Humility: 

Holding to historic Christian gender ethics doesn’t mean being combative or defensive.
It’s possible to be confident in one’s beliefs while also being humble and acknowledging that not everyone sees things the same way. 
Continue to sharing truth, but with gentleness and respect (1 Peter 3:15), ensuring that your tone and attitude remain Christ-like.

Practical Tips:

Be Transparent About Your Convictions: When asked about your beliefs, share them calmly and without shame.
You can say something like, “I believe that our bodies are a gift from God and that God was intentional about our biological sex.
I understand not everyone agrees, but this is where I land based on Scripture.”

Admit Your Limits: Recognize and verbalize that you don’t have all the answers. 
For example, you could say, “I’m still learning, and I don’t have this all figured out, 
but I’m committed to following what I believe God calls us to do with compassion and truth.”

Separate People from Beliefs: Be careful to communicate that your disagreement with their belief does not reflect a judgment of their worth or character. 
“I can disagree with you on this and still deeply care about and respect you.

Own Mistakes: If you’ve handled previous conversations poorly or have been overly harsh, humbly apologize. 
Saying, “I realize I came across as judgmental in the past, and that’s not how I want to engage with you,” can go a long way.

What Not to Do: Avoid using religious jargon that might come across as overly preachy or self-righteous.
Avoid presenting your views as the only interpretation of Scripture or as a hammer to wield in discussions.

Define, communicate, and stick to your boundaries. But also know when to take a break.
Avoid using boundaries as punishment or permanently shutting down the relationship
4. Boundaries if needed

[Notes]
Set Boundaries When Necessary: 

While love and understanding are primary, recognize that there are situations where setting healthy boundaries is needed, 
especially if relationships become toxic or harmful.
Seek wise counsel and prayer when determining when and how to set those boundaries without severing the relationship entirely.

Practical Tips:

Define Your Boundaries: Decide ahead of time what conversations or interactions might cross a line for you. For instance, if a person constantly brings up the issue in a confrontational way, you might say, “I’d like us to stay connected, but I feel like our conversations about trans issues are becoming too contentious, and I need a break from discussing this topic for a while.”

Communicate Boundaries Clearly and Kindly: When setting boundaries, be clear about what you need for the relationship to stay healthy. For example, “I really value our friendship, but I’m uncomfortable with the way we keep arguing about this. I’d love to keep talking, but I think we need to focus on other topics.”

Stick to Your Boundaries: Be consistent in maintaining the boundaries you set, while continuing to show love in other ways. If someone repeatedly violates the boundary, gently remind them: “I’ve asked that we steer away from this topic for now, and I appreciate your understanding.”

Know When to Take a Break: If the relationship becomes too toxic or draining, it’s okay to take a step back temporarily. You can say, “I care about you and our relationship, but I need a little space right now to process and take care of my own heart.”
	
What Not to Do: Avoid setting boundaries as an ultimatum or a form of punishment. Boundaries should be about protecting the relationship, not cutting someone off.
Avoid shutting down the relationship altogether unless absolutely necessary; leave room for future reconnection.

Focus on being faithful in how you represent Christ
Accept that not all differences will be reconciled immediately
Relationships can grow through long-term patience and grace
5. Trust the Holy Spirit

[Notes]
Trust in the Holy Spirit’s Work:

Trust in God’s work in both Christians and non-Christians who disagree.
Instead of trying to “win” arguments, focus on being faithful in how you represent Christ in these conversations
and trusting that God is working in hearts, even when you cannot see it.

It’s essential to understand that not all differences will be reconciled immediately.
Relationships can grow through long-term patience and grace.
It’s okay for conversations to remain unresolved for a time,
but what matters is the consistency of love and the willingness to remain in relationship despite differences.
Webinar Key Questions

Thinking Theologically about Gender Ethics
Learning from Christian Participation in the Gay Marriage Debate
How can Christians think and speak differently about trans topics?
Biblical, Compassionate Care for Trans People
Maintaining Relationship & Convictions
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
QUESTIONS?

