


JESUS

& SEXUALITY

[Notes]
What did Jesus say and do?



Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage




[Notes]
Here’s what I’m going to share with you
We’ll tease these out, and then we will explore what we do with this and why is matters to us



Never Married
Jesus never married and was celibate
No direct references but taught since the Early Church
Some point to Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2




[Notes]
He never married and was celibate
This has been the understanding and teaching of the Church since the early Church
Some reference Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2 as further evidence — the Church is the bride of Christ, so he can have no other bride
A simple but important fact



Never Married
If the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish? To what extent do we need romance, marriage, and sex?



12

[Notes]
if the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish?

Should challenge us that those things aren’t necessary to flourish
But that’s what culture tells us is fulfilling
So should leave us with the question, “What is necessary for flourishing?”



Encourage Celibacy
Jesus talked about marriage and celibacy in Matthew 19:1-12
Raised the standard of commitment in marriage
Encouraged celibacy
Compared to eunuchs (voluntary and involuntary)




[Notes]
He talked about marriage and celibacy and ultimately encouraged celibacy and said that it was given, not chosen
Let’s Read Matthew 19:1-12 and then we’ll talk about what that means for us



Encourage Celibacy
Jesus encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and recognized that celibacy is given.

Most of us assume we will get married. How could this challenge the way we think about our future? Are we truly open to being called to celibacy?




25

[Notes]
Importantly, Jesus recognizes that celibacy is not always chosen and that some who are called to celibacy are called involuntarily.
We tend to think celibacy is voluntary and nice for those who choose it. But we want to get married. If instead celibacy is given, how should we think about our own calling? How should we be discerning our call? Are we willing to be celibate if God calls us to that?



A New Covenant
Christ’s sacrifice established a new covenant in Ephesians 1:3-14
Adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s sacrifice
Marriage and procreation are still good but not commandments




[Notes]
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage and procreation were no longer commandments
the promises God made to His people in the Old Testament were promises of temporal flourishing fulfilled through offspring, so procreation was a commandment
but Christ’s sacrifice establishes a new covenant: Ephesians 1:3-14
Let’s read Ephesians 1:3-14

Previously, to be in God’s family you had to be born a Jew and maintain that relationship with God through sacrifices
But in this letter Paul is proclaiming that the Greeks in the Church in Ephesus are now in the family of God
we are adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s work on the cross
while marriage and procreation are still good, they are no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises and they are no longer commanded



A New Covenant
People of the Old Testament saw marrying and having children as a beautiful way to obey God and fulfill His promises. How can we learn to see celibacy and spiritual procreation in the same way?



34

[Notes]
People of the Old Testament saw marrying and having children as a beautiful way to obey God and fulfill His promises. How can we learn to see celibacy and spiritual procreation in the same way?

Our churches don’t talk about celibacy
They don’t celebrate celibate people
They don’t really support celibacy



A Celibate Future
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Matt 22:30 - There will be no marriage, sex, or romance in the New Heaven and New Earth (NHNE)
Christ’s life is an example of how we will live and his resurrection starts the process of realizing NHNE




[Notes]
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Christ’ resurrection begins the process of redeeming creation and bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth
NHNE is a physical place, not floating spiritual orbs
And in Matthew 22:30 Jesus says “At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.”
Christ revealed that in the New Heaven and New Earth, there will be no marriage or sex or romance
So Christ’s life of celibacy is an example of how we will live in the next life
And his resurrection put in motion the work of redeeming creation, bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth, and realizing this place where there is neither marriage nor sex



A Celibate Future
If the vocation of celibacy is a foretaste of how we will all be in the New Heaven and the New Earth, could that make it a higher calling in some ways? How should that change how we think about celibacy?



41

[Notes]
If the vocation of celibacy is a foretaste of how we will all be in the New Heaven and the New Earth, could that make it a higher calling in some ways? How should that change how we think about celibacy?

We shouldn’t see it as a curse or a lesser vocation
Perhaps even see it as a better vocation




Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage




[Notes]
So Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex, so they are not necessary for a full human life
He encouraged his disciples to consider celibacy and taught that celibacy was given, not chosen, so we too should discern our calling
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill his promises, so celibacy is equally good and should be celebrated
His resurrection started the work of bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth where we will all be celibate, perhaps lifting it up as a higher calling



But Wait!
Does that mean Jesus is calling us to live lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?

NO!




[Notes]
But wait, does that mean Jesus is calling us to lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?
NO!



Created for Intimacy
We were created for intimacy with God and other people
While many of you will get married, Christ redefines family to make the Body of Christ our first family (Mark 3:31-35)
Yet, we will always be lonely




[Notes]
We are created for intimacy with God and with other people
We all need connection, relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive love
We all need emotional, spiritual, and physical connection
We are all created to enjoy those in the context of family
And many of you will end up getting married and that will be a beautiful source of relationship and family
But Christ redefines that to—he calls us to see the Body of Christ as our first family (Mark 3:31-35)

31 Then Jesus’ mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent someone in to call him. 32 A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.”
33 “Who are my mother and my brothers?” he asked.
34 Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, “Here are my mother and my brothers! 35 Whoever does God’s will is my brother and sister and mother.”

Jesus is hanging out with the disciples and others learning from him
Mother and brother ask him to come outside
Basically, “Hey, we’re you’re family, we’re you’re first priority, come outside”
And he rejects that idea that his biological family is his first priority
Instead, he says that the family of God, other Christians, are his first family and his first priority

So yes we are created for intimacy with God and other people, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that that will be fulfilled in a biological family
We can find that same family in relationship with other Christians

Yet, we also need to recognize that because this world is broken, we will always be lonely. Even if we end up getting married and we have a great relationship with God



Challenging Culture
What do we do with Christ’s life and teachings about celibacy, marriage, romance, and sex?

Wrestle with the conflict between Christ’s life and teachings and culture’s narrative of romantic and sexual fulfillment.




[Notes]
So what should we do with Christ’s teachings about celibacy, marriage, romance, and sex?
He encourages celibacy, that sex and romance are not necessary for a full life, that marriage and procreation are no longer commandments, and that we will all be celibate in the next life
At the very least, this is in stark contrast to culture’s narrative about romantic and sexual fulfillment
We need to wrestle with that conflict and be open to God changing the ways we think about romance and sex



So why me?
People like me are the only people seriously considering celibacy.

I am gay and a Christian and my understanding is that God calls all people to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex.




[Notes]
So why am I here?
the only people thinking about this are people like me
I am gay and a Christian and my understanding is that God calls all people to celibacy or marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I believe I will enjoy the most goodness in my life if I obey God, and I don’t see a context for same-sex sexual or romantic relationship that God blesses
So I am forced to consider celibacy as a real option, but what I see in the Church is a place where centuries of straight Christians have ignored these teachings
not just to my detriment, but to theirs as well



The Problem
Most churches are optimized for married people and ignore Christ’s teachings
As a result, difficult to flourish in celibacy
Many leave the Church or get married contrary to their calling to celibacy




[Notes]
most churches are optimized for married people and ignore these teachings because they are inconvenient
as a result, difficult to do celibacy well
and people called to celibacy either leave the church or get married contrary to their calling



My Challenge to You
Do you really think sexual and romantic fulfillment are necessary to be fully human?
Do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
If not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?




[Notes]
So what I want to leave you with is this:
regardless of whether you are a Christian or not
I challenge you to consider the modern narrative about sexual and romantic fulfillment
do you really think those are necessary to be fully human?
do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
And if not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?
