
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

welcome + prayer

pop quiz!

about us

our story

[Notes]
Equip got started because of my own experience of being a Christian, being gay, and struggling to find people to help me make sense of my story with grace and truth

But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic

that was nearly a decade ago
since then we’ve gotten to work with thousands of Christian leaders

there have been so many encouraging moments
one recent story that comes to mind is from a pastor who does ministry with high schoolers
he’s done training with Equip
and has continued learning with a lot of the free resources that Equip offers leaders every month
he first got connected to Equip because a trans kid started coming to youth group
he didn’t know what to do, but another pastor suggested he check out Equip
he learned from Equip how to share about God’s wisdom for everyone, including trans people
and he learned from Equip how to also embody the kindness and compassion of Jesus
he doesn’t shy away from teaching what the Scriptures have to say
but he also makes sure youth group is a space where every kid is welcome to show up, worship, study to scriptures, and share honestly about their story and questions
this trans kid and their friends actually shared that this youth group was the only Christian space they’d ever been in where they felt welcomed
they kept showing up
even though they disagreed, they were willing to learn about Jesus and his wisdom for our sexualities
because this youth pastor was actually reflecting the love and care of Jesus

that’s the kind of impact Equip has
we’re equipping the next generation of leaders
we’re doing a work of multiplication
and ultimately, this is all about the gospel
people’s perceptions of faith & sexuality questions is frequently reported as the #1 barrier to accepting Jesus as their savior

so when we teach youth pastors and parents and Christian leaders of all kinds how to offer Christ’s love and wisdom for LGBT+ people
it’s not just about ethics
it’s about removing the #1 barrier to people getting to know Jesus
it’s about making Christ’s love and wisdom for LGBT+ people an asset for the gospel instead of a barrier
so that millions more will come to know Jesus
that’s what the work of Equip is all about

questions?

what’s next?



Please consider…
Praying that leaders trained by Equip would bring 5 people to Christ this season
Introducing your Equip Board Member to   5 different people/churches/orgs you know
Giving $500 to Equip to help churches offer Christ’s love & wisdom to LGBT+ people

who won?

pray with & for us!
