


LOVING

SEXUAL MINORITIES




[Notes]
Pieter Valk
EQUIP
recognized need for the Church to love sexual minorities better, to have a better theology about sexuality, and to come alongside sexual minorities better from my own story and stories of friends
mission

worked with Lipscomb
Student Life Team
counseling students
chapel series
faculty training



Training Goal
To equip you to minister to those who experience same-sex attraction and manage challenging interactions with sexual minority participants on a case-by-case basis






Why?
Missions trips provide…
Unique opportunities for sexual minorities to share their story and be ministered to
Unique challenges when sexual minorities share in ways that make others uncomfortable




[Notes]
bond with team members
unfamiliar contexts
sexual minority trip members can be vulnerable

God call story into the light



Training Objectives
Learn from the story of someone who experiences same-sex attraction
Explore the development of same-sex attraction
Consider the theological foundations for your beliefs
Get equipped to minster to sexual minorities
Practice resolving common




[Notes]
50/50 teach and talk
condensed from 4.5 hours to a little more than 2 hours

to better empathize with sexual minorities
to identify core wounds and areas of shared experience
to develop a compassionate and consistent posture

practice applying 1-4 in 5



Share
What have you experiences been?
On trips? Participants? Locals?
Personal life? Family? Friends?




[Notes]
terms



HEAR A STORY


[Notes]
empathize with sexual minorities
see impact of family, church, and society
imagine a participant with this story

Pain and redemption
Not over
Very common





Questions to Consider
What aspects of the story have participants shared in the past?
What significant events/relationships contributed to the development of SSA
How did the Church fail to respond (both parents and pastors)?
Can you imagine having had a participant in the past with this same story but afraid to share?






Share
What aspects of the story have participants shared in the past?
What significant events/relationships contributed to the development of SSA
How did the Church fail to respond (both parents and pastors)?
Can you imagine having had a participant in the past with this same story but afraid to share?






DEVELOPMENT


[Notes]
see how little choice sexual minorities have
not so you can dissect people, but seeing factors useful in ministering
find common ground between you and sexual minority participants






Development of SSA
Correlated but not necessarily causal
At least 4 of 6 factors involved in 90% of cases
Every process is unique
Common among OSA individuals

[Notes]
Matheson believes causal, but hard to prove (has not yet been published)
adaptation




Development of SSA

[Notes]
Connecting to my story but apply to women
Woven in all of these effects of spiritual attack, sins of others, personal sin, and generational sin
Often seems like Satan is the orchestrator of the perfect storm that these factors contribute to
child’s perception, not reality

equifinality - multiple pathways to the same outcome 
multifinality - group of people with same factors have different outcomes





Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Unhealthy Relationships with Parents
neglected
abandoned
mismatched
abused
smothered




controlled
overprotected
traumatized
criticized
shamed
unmet needs for healthy attachment

[Notes]
Healthy: Father present, communicates value, intimate
Healthy: Mom is a strong comforter and encourager with healthy boundaries that allow child to fail and be a man





Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Inaccurate Perceptions of Genders
Incongruence with same gender
different, not part of, uncomfortable, mysterious
Lack of distinction from opposite gender
same, dangerous, nothing to offer, not complementary
gender: traits, roles, and expectations learned from family and society

[Notes]
Healthy: See men as same, belong, enough, comfortable
Healthy: identify and distinguish: exotic, different, complimentary, give and take





Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Genetic and Biological
Genes – predisposed, not determined
Physical bodies 
size, proportionality, athleticism,  secondary sex characteristics
Emotional disposition 
temperament and aptitude

[Notes]
none of us are how God made us

Gay gene has not been found
Twins studies 48% to 8%
I can speak with authority
Doubt this factor alone could cause SSA

Probably genetic predisposition
Less athletic, narrow shoulders
Didn’t like rough-housing






Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Sexual Abuse
Common
From the same or opposite sex
Gender incongruity or opposition to opposite sex
Shame





Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Sexualization (Psychological Learning)
We associate ideas and adopt behaviors based on our experiences, which are reinforced by rewards and punishments
Neurons that fire together wire together

[Notes]
we learn some aspects of our sexuality
associate things that weren’t once linked

Anxiety and fear -> erections
Previous factor -> insecurity and inferiority
Confident guys -> anxiety -> erection
Society says erection = attraction

Very common
Teenagers = hormones
Pornography
Perfect men in heterosexual porn

My example in story





Development of SSA




Development of SSA
Psychological Vulnerabilities
Shame
Anxiety
Depression
Isolation

Obsessive compulsion
Addiction
Trauma
Many others





Development of SSA
Take-aways
Predisposed but not determined
No one chooses SSA
Wholeness is a process
Gender is impactful




Development of SSA
Take-aways
Pornography is destructive
Sexual attraction is not an oppositional binary
Everyone has experienced one of these




Share

Which factors were you surprised by?
Which factors did you expect?
Have any of these factors been a part of your story?
Have participants shared about any of these factors?




Female vs Male SSA

Attractions, Emotional Dependency, and Sexual Behavior

Search for Home

The Heart of Female Same-sex Attraction

[Notes]
Home = stability, trust, protection, and safety in mother and father

Without, in search of home -> codependent relationships with other women

healthy attachment with same-sex parent crucial.




THEOLOGY


[Notes]
know what you believe and why
so that you can have informed conversations with participants



My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin.

Homosexual activity is a sin.

No promise of change in SSA.

We do not choose who we are attracted to but we choose how we respond.

[Notes]
what I believe
shared by Lipscomb
they’re good ones
similar
different



My Beliefs



Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all.

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully.



My Beliefs



God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like.

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ.



Share
Would you feel comfortable sharing your beliefs with participants?

What have the ranges of belief been among your participants?






Why?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin

Marriage defined between man and women

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage

Written for a people in a time and place



Why?



Created for perfect intimacy with God and the Body of Christ

Intimacy needs are good and normal

Neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meet intimacy needs

[Notes]
deeper, foundational truths about how God created us as relational beings
you’ll see how we don’t really believe these or act upon them

define intimacy needs
God creates Eve, Jesus when tempted and in garden, in Heaven
if we don’t meet in healthy ways or will meet in unhealthy ways

so for the sexual minority, yes, you were created for intimacy, but no one is promised or needs sex or marriage to meet their intimacy needs

but we don’t know how to meet needs outside of marriage or sex
and straight people don’t do this, so why should sexual minorities?




Why?



The Blessing of Singleness (really)

Every person is first called to singleness

Singleness and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges

[Notes]
regardless of whether marriage later, all people should learn to do this well first

few churches teach these things
Church lift marriage on a pedestal and fail to provide support for single people to do singleness well



Why?



The Uniqueness of Christian Marriage

One man and one woman before God

Reflection of intimacy and complementarity in trinity

Centrality of child-rearing
Responsibility and commitment

[Notes]
many called out of singleness into marriage

it’s not that we’re saying we don’t want gay people to be happy
its just that Christian marriage has been uniquely reserved for a specific purpose

instead what we often hear in the church is that every has a right to be married and the purpose of marriage is to make you happy



Why?



All are called to steward sexuality in inconvenient ways

All can meet their intimacy needs in singleness

[Notes]
the invitation to those who experience same-sex attraction is no less good and the challenges are no more great



Why?



Instead…

All are promised marriage 

We can’t meet our intimacy needs as single people 

Marriage is about being happy and we don’t need permission

[Notes]
so we shouldn’t be surprised that no one takes us seriously
that leaves us with a challenge as a church to foster a community where people can meet their intimacy needs as single people and teach accurately about marriage





So what?
People don’t care what we believe or why we believe it.

They care whether we are offering something better.






Share
Have you overheard participants talking about marriage as the answer to loneliness?

Would single adults be able to meet their intimacy needs in meaningful friendship in our community?

Do we invite sinners of all kinds to share about their experience without shame or ultimatums?






So what?
Offer something better




[Notes]
if we really want to convince people—if we want them to believe and become—we have to offer something better—it’s on us



Be the Church.



Accurate theology about marriage

Nondiscriminatory application of Scripture

Shame-free church to talk about experience

Robust culture of singleness

Spiritual friendship to meet  intimacy needs



Share.
Could the community found among team members be a shame-free place for sexual minorities to share their story?
Could that community be a place for meaningful, healthy friendships?
How can you as staff foster that?







MINISTER





LGBT+ Persons
Be compassionate
Respect their right to choose
Minister to core wounds
Trust the Holy Spirit


[Notes]
next section applies to all who experience same-sex attraction—both LGBT+ and traditional sexual ethic, but want to address specifics to ministering to LGBT+ persons

be compassionate 
     recognize sins of the Church 
     motivated by desire for the best things 
respect right to choose 
     you can’t control their choice anyway 
     just want them to be honest with themselves 
minister to core wounds 
trust the HS 
     obedience, not results 




Ministering: Core Q’s



Will you treat me differently now that you know?
Honesty
Honor courage in sharing

[Notes]
8 questions
creating space for questions, helping think well, and listening well 
don’t expect you to answer questions for them






How do I make sense of how I feel?
Why did God let this happen?
What is normal? What is abnormal?
How did this happen?
Ministering: Core Q’s






How do I refrain from behavior?
Pray for strength
Eliminate opportunities
Accountability
Ministering: Core Q’s






What do I do with all of this shame?
Satan’s primary weapon
Our response:
Identify, Reject, & Replace
Share
Ministering: Core Q’s






5. Where do I find my identity? Where do I belong?
Promises in Scripture
Body of Christ


Ministering: Core Q’s






6. How do I meet my intimacy needs?

What are my needs?

Normalize
Jesus: angels in the wilderness and disciples in Gethsemane

Stewardship of meeting in     healthy ways

Ministering: Core Q’s




Ministering: Core Q’s

Can you help me?
Minister to Core Wounds
Family of Origin
Gender Identification
Inaccurate Beliefs/Theology
Counseling for Sexual Abuse, Addiction, and Psychological Issues






What can I expect?

Promise of change in same-sex attraction

Seek understanding of SSA

Manage temptation

Intimacy with God and His family and working to redeem the world

Ministering: Core Q’s



Share.
Which of these questions would you feel most comfortable helping a participant think through?

Least comfortable?






PRACTICE


[Notes]
case-by-case
commonly anticipated scenarios



Case 1
While on your trip, a participant shares, “I feel like I know you guys better than most people and I trust you. I want you to know that I’m gay. I know what the Bible says, but I strongly believe that if I got married to another Christian man, God would bless it.” Later, another participant shares the he isn’t comfortable sleeping in the same room as someone who is gay or being in the same public shower.




[Notes]
take 2 minutes to reflect on your own
1) what do you see as most challenging?
2) what would you do?



Case 2
Your team is enjoying the local culture in a cafe downtown when a flamboyant LGBT festival begins and builds in intensity. You see some participants quietly talking to each other and hear one snicker, “Look at those fags."






Case 3
A person shares during team building that a sibling recently came out as lesbian and that it devastated the family. “She brought her girlfriend to the house and just told my parents and told them that if they wanted her in their life, they needed to accept that she was gay and love her girlfriend. It made me so angry. She can’t talk to mom and dad like that. I know people don’t choose who they’re attracted to, but being in a relationship with another girl is still wrong.” Another student interjects, defending a gay-affirming theology passionately. You look around and see one particular student with great fear in her eyes, and you suspect it is because she also experiences same-sex attraction.






Case 4
During application interviews, you notice that the gentleman dresses in more gender-neutral ways, displays more feminine mannerisms, and speaks with a more feminine inflection. He never states that he is gay and you never ask, but you know the host partner for the trip he is applying might be uncomfortable with the student’s presentation.






Case 5
During sharing time in the middle of service week, a participant shares tearfully, “I have never felt better loved than by this group. I want to tell you something that I rarely tell people. I have been hurt in the past but I think I can trust this group. I experience same-sex attraction, and I hate it. I don't want to be gay or be in relationship with another guy and trying to figure all of that out alone has been painful and lonely. And to be honest, I am afraid for our trip to be over and all of us going back to pretending like we don’t know each other in a month—I don’t know if I can do this alone anymore."






Case 6
Two months before your trip is scheduled, a team member shares with you that two of the girls on the trip are lesbians, and not only that, but they are dating. You are reminded that the sleeping arrangements for this trip have all of the girls sleeping in fairly close proximity in a single room, and it has not been uncommon in the past for women to huddle together while sleeping as nights can get chilly.







Resources
University Counseling Center
Campus Ministry
Intimacy Wholeness Group
Questioning Group






Get Involved
Continue conversation
Support the work financially
Refer potential leaders






SURVEY

