






My hope for the Church is that…
(gay) celibate Christians would find real family

[Notes]
My hope for the Church is that gay people called to the celibacy of Jesus and Paul will soon find the family in the body of Christ they need to thrive in their calling with reasonable effort.
Or to put it more simply
My hope for the Church is that gay celibate Christians would find real family

And notice that I’ve put the word gay in parenthesis
Because I don’t think gay celibate Christians are the only celibate Christians suffering from a lack of support from the Church
And, as you’ll see, the steps we need to take are the same for both and will benefit both!
We hear about this need more acutely from gay celibate Christians, and there’s reasons for that, but better teaching and support of vocational singleness is needed for the whole church



Pieter Valk of
equipyourcommunity.org/loved

[Notes]
But first, a little about me
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
I’ve been published in places like Christianity Today
and taught at over 65 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip—a premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
We’ve trained over 11,000 Christian leaders
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenically Christian monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
And I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belonging in the body of Christ
this work matters to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic
What do I mean when I say “a traditional sexual ethic”?
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

I also want to make a quick note about terminology. I’m going to use the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex. I don’t use that word to communicate anything about people’s theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out. It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”. And I’ll use the phrase “gay Christian” to refer to people who are Christians and experience same-sex attraction. I use that phrase to describe myself because that’s the term that I’m most comfortable with. But not everyone uses that phrase, and Christians I respect prefer to use different language. There is healthy discussion Christians can have about that disagreement. For now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.

Final note: if you’d like a copy of my full notes after this, go to equipyourcommunity.org/loved to give me an email address to send them to


WE FEEL IT


[Notes]
So why do I want the Church to become a place where celibate Christians find real family?
Why do those of us called to vocational singleness need the Church to offer us family?
Well first, because we feel that we need it
Intuitively, we know it







Left out of covid bubbles
Alone in mundane times,          painful times, and joyful times
Who will be at dinner next Tuesday? At Christmas a decade from now? At my deathbed?
We feel the need

[Notes]
we feel that we need family
You felt that when you were left out of covid bubbles
And hurt when everyone else posted about how grateful they were to have at least their spouse and kids to endure lockdown with
Or posted about that one other nuclear family they created a covid bubble with,
All while you doom-scrolled through their meals and movie nights you weren’t invited to

You feel that when you do mundane times alone - breakfast before work, laundry, making dinner, watching your favorite show
You feel that when you do painful times alone - getting fired, losing a loved one, not getting your bid on a house, learning about an illness, seeing tragedy on the news that hits close to home
You feel that when you celebrate alone - decade birthdays, promotions, new jobs, paying off student loans, graduations, well-cooked dinner, new pet
You feel that when you tire of the revolving door of roommates and small groups and temporary mentors

You feel that when you wonder who will be at dinner next week
who will you spend holidays with year after year
who will be there when you die

After college I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
But each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.
And every time I connected deeply with people in healthy ways—only for that connection to be torn—I was injured.
Eventually my heart started yelling and screaming in resistance, "Not again! This is too painful!”
My heart made clear that I couldn't connect deeply again unless it was safe.
I knew what safe meant: real, permanent family 



MADE FOR IT


[Notes]
We don’t just feel we need it. We're all made for intimacy in permanent family











We’re all made for intimacy                           in permanent family.

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.
We feel the need

[Notes]
How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.







Made for intimacy…
The love in God’s family is intimate
We’re created in God’s image for intimacy
Our sexuality is our need for intimacy
We’re made mind, body, and spirit
We feel the need

[Notes]
He created us for intimacy

The love in God's family is intimate. The persons of the Trinity know each other perfectly and are fully known by each other.

In John 17:20, Jesus speaks longingly about the Trinity when praying for his disciples: “‘My prayer is not for them alone.
I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you.
May they...be one as we are one—I in them and you in me—so that they may be brought to complete unity.
Then the world will know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.’

God the Father reciprocates this affection. Just after Jesus is baptized, the following happens in Matthew 3:16-17
“...At that moment heaven was opened, and [Jesus] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him.
And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.’”

Then we're created in God’s image for the same things, and our sexuality is our need for intimacy,
our need to be in relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive love,
and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on an emotional level, intellectual level, physical level, and spiritual level.







Made for intimacy…
Neither sex nor romance promised or necessary
Everyone needs non-romantic, non-sexual intimacy beyond God and one’s spouse
We feel the need

[Notes]
At the same time, neither sex nor romance are promised in Scripture or necessary to meet our intimacy needs or be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Paul was committed to celibacy. Many of the mothers and fathers of the Church have been celibate.
And Jesus says that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex.

In Matthew 22:30, He says this: “At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.” It doesn’t make too much sense that the example of our faith was celibate or that we will all be celibate in heaven if marriage and sex are necessary to be fully human.

I mean, yes, if you're married, you'll meet some of your intimacy needs in your relationship with your spouse.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t meet all of your intimacy needs.
You will still need emotional intimacy, intellectual intimacy, physical intimacy, and spiritual intimacy from friendship.
We’re all made for it







Made for intimacy in permanent family
God put Himself in families
God’s family is permanent
We too are made in His image                 for permanent family
We feel the need

[Notes]
We're not just made for intimacy
We're made for intimacy IN PERMANENT FAMILY

God put Himself in families. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a family called the Trinity.
And the Trinity created this world, made man, gave us choice, and sent His son to live a perfect life and die on the cross for our sins so that we could be a part of His family.
The Bible goes even further to establish that God is in family and He invites us into that family by calling us, the group of people who follow Jesus, Christ’s bride and calling Jesus our groom.
We’re being married into the family of God.

Plus the love in that family is permanent. There is a perfect and permanent faithfulness in the Trinity and from Christ to His people.
No matter what we do, God will never abandon us or withhold his love.

Lamentations 3:22-23 says it this way: “The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases; His mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is [God’s] faithfulness.”

Then, because we are created in God’s image, we too are made for intimacy in permanent family

But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids. In Matthew 12:46-50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family,
rejecting familial ties based solely on biology and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ:

“While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him.
Someone told him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.’
But to the one who had told him this, Jesus replied, ‘Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?’ And pointing to his disciples, he said,
‘Here are my mother and my brothers! For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’”









Jesus family:
a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other
We feel the need

[Notes]
Jesus defines Christian family as a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other.

but Jesus still means a robust idea of family
He still means people you live with in the same house, share meals with daily, sit next to and pray with, celebrate holidays with,
leisure with on your days off, and do boring daily mundane life with

So We feel we need family
And We’re all made for intimacy IN PERMANENT FAMILY
Even singles?





EVEN SINGLES


[Notes]
Even those called to vocational singleness? Yes!







Still a call to permanent family
Jesus compared celibates to eunuchs who lived in the king's home (Matt 19)
Jesus promises celibates 100-fold spiritual family in this life (Luke 18:28-30)
Paul recognizes celibates need committed companionship (1 Cor 7:36-38)
Paul urges family of widows to keep commitments to community (1 Tim 5)
Even singles

[Notes]
The Church has most consistently understood the Scriptures to teach that while vocational singleness is a call to permanently give up romance, dating,
marriage, sex, and children to do kingdom work parents struggle to find the time, energy, and focus to do,
it's still a call to intimacy in family.

1. In Matthew 19:11-12, Jesus compares the celibate to Old Testament eunuchs who lived in the king's family home while serving his kingdom
They often out-lived the patriarch
they were a part of the family
When Jesus makes this comparison, part of what he’s doing is promising us that we’ll find family in God’s family, the king we serve

2. In Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises 100-fold spiritual brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those
who permanently give up spouse and children for the sake of kingdom work.
he promises FAMILY
100-fold family to those committed to vocational singleness

3. 1 Corinthians 7:36-38, Paul recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need human companionship
by blessing an early Church form of family for celibates.

4. 1 Tim 5:5-15, Paul recognizes a proto-convent house that provided family to widows
and urges them to faithfully keep their commitments to celibacy and the community.







Still a call to permanent family
Every time Jesus&Paul speak of celibacy, they recognize they still need human intimacy in permanent, lived-in family
For most, God chooses not to magically meet our human intimacy needs and instead invites us to build family with other believers
Even singles

[Notes]
Every time Jesus and Paul speak of vocational singleness,
they seem to recognize in some way that celibates still need human intimacy in permanent, lived-in family.

Perhaps some called to vocational singleness have an even more exceptional filling of the Holy Spirit
such that they don't need as much human intimacy.
But for most celibates I know (including myself), God does not choose to magically meet our human intimacy needs.
Instead, he invites us to build family with other believers.


DIFFICULT


[Notes]
But it's difficult for those called to vocational singleness to find permanent family, right?







Industrial Revolution and the slow breakdown of community (Rodney Clapp’s Families at the Crossroads)

Today: the idol of Romance
Disney movies + Taylor swift songs     say magical love is the highest good
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
In Rodney Clapp's "Families at the Crossroads" he argues that the primary reason for the breakdown of a broader experience of community
where celibates could find family was the industrial revolution
but not intentionally
it was accidental
you see, all of a sudden a bunch more people could afford to move cities and buy single family homes
but they didn't pause to think whether they should, even if they could
So they put miles and doors between each other
And community where vocational singles could find family broke down
We started slipping through the cracks

in recent decades, that’s continued with the idolatry of romance
I'm particular to say the idolatry of romance her
and not the idolatry of marriage
because healthy theology and practice of Christian marriage is not the problem
and this idol of romance takes its roots LONG before marriage
Disney channel movies and Taylor Swift songs tells us that magically coupled love is the best thing the world has to offer







"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue…A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself…every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil...to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.”
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
And Christians don't do much better
Do you recognize this quote from a #1 selling book about Christian masculinity?

"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue…
A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself…every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil...to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.”

Do you see the idolatry of romance in that quote?

From an early age, parents and pastors highlight Bible stories and holidays centering romance and marriage.
When they say “When you get married…” and ask, “Are you dating anyone?”
they leave no room for stories or celebrations of singleness for the sake of Christ’s kingdom.
Christian teens assume they are free to indulge in romance as much as they want, as long as they don’t cross certain lines.
72% of pastors surveyed believe “If a person desires to marry and have kids, then God wants them to marry.”

This all leads to painful results
Half of married Christians get divorced
And studies show that singles struggle more with depression, anxiety, doubt in God’s existence, and rebounding from doubt.








The Idol of Romance promises us easy and perfectly satisfying love, belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness. At what cost?

Casual connection,          codependency, adultery,              divorce, etc.
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
The Idol of Romance promises us easy and perfectly satisfying love,
belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness.
At what costs?
casual connection, codependency, adultery, divorce

No wonder vocational singles can’t find the family we need

Plus, we don’t quite know what that would look like if we did find it
We certainly don’t know how to build it
And we can’t do it alone


DONE BEFORE


[Notes]
But thankfully, we've done this before
The Church has a rich history of offering vocational singles robust family in the body of Christ







remnuoth - city celibates
Permanent (not waiting for marriage)
Informal single-sex urban clusters + part of local churches (not alone or cloistered)
Participated in economy (not just praying)
Served church + city (not neglecting others)
Common (not exceptional)
We’ve done it before
James E. Goehring, Greg Peters, Vincent Desprez

[Notes]
according to primary sources about celibacy in the first five centuries of the church
Before cave monks and dessert ascetics and cloistered monasteries

there were what’s called the remnuoth
city celibates
And they walked out this city celibacy in a particular way

First, their celibacy was permanent
the disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy
Instead of waiting for marriage
We’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus.

Second, they lived in cities in homes with other celibates of the same sex in informal monasteries
and they were still a part of their local churches
Instead of living alone or cloistered from married Christians

Third, they were still a part of the economic life of the city
Instead of praying all day in closets or caves

Fourth, they felt called to leverage their availability in singleness to serve others in their church and their city
Instead of running away to serve themselves

And fifth, they were common
there were tens of thousands of them, actually 20,000 of them in one city no larger than 100,000 according to records
This wasn’t exceptional

THIS is the secret sauce

And We've done just that in Nashville
Remember my story from earlier about those 4 failed attempts at intentional Christian community?
Well in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie, my old pastor
I shared that I felt called to vocational singleness, but I didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need some kind of family
I asked him how I could find the family in the body of Christ I needed?
And he responded:
”To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family.
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church
The greatest source of theology in the Church
And the greatest source of social justice in the Church
I think you should start something in Nashville
Build the family you need
And stay connected to our church and teach us how to do family better
Find 2-3 other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!


James E. Goehring, Ascetics, Society and the Desert (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 1999)
Chapter 1 of my The Story of Monasticism (Baker Academic, 2015)
Vincent Desprez, "Christian Asceticism between the New Testament and the Beginning of Monasticism," American Benedictine Review 42 (1991): 163-178, 334-344 and 356-373 -- This issue of the ABR is available from the Haithi Trust.








We’ve done it before

[Notes]
fast forward to today...the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness. We’re still a part of our local churches. We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood. We’re still connected to parents and their kids. And 6 of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family as we discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other. (and another 3 or so are considering moving in and committing this fall)







Start an intentional Christian community
Move in with an unrelated nuclear family
Live with biological family
We’ve done it before

[Notes]
Now there’s multiple ways vocational singles can find permanent family
In addition to starting an intentional Christina community, you could
Move in with an unrelated nuclear family and eventually make commitments with them
Or you can commit to living with some of your biological family

but can I particularly commend this remnuoth solution to you? The way of these early church city celibates?
because it's been the most successful way celibate Christians have found family historically
and there's something particularly life-giving about living with people called to the same vocation who can empathize with you and challenge you



GET BUSY


[Notes]
So how?
How can we build this kind of family?







Live with 3 people for a year
Pray together once a day + confess to each other once a week
Share 2 meals a week
Serve your neighborhood once a month
Spend 1 vacation and 1 big holiday together
Read a book about discernment and/or community
So get busy

[Notes]
if you think you might be called to the celibacy of Jesus and Paul,
could I challenge you to move somewhere where this already exists,
or build it yourself

I’m not special.
Any of you—empowered by the Holy Spirit—could build this

And you don't have to start big.

just find 3 other people willing to live in an apartment together and commit to celibacy for a year
do some simple prayer together once a day
confess to each other once a week
do 2 meals together a week
maybe serve in your neighborhood together once a month
go on a vacation together
do one of the big holidays together
read a book about discernment or intentional Christian community together
celebrate kingdom work successes together
mourn loneliness together

You don’t have to do all of these
But gather some people, do something for a year, and see what happens







Don’t wait for your pastor to do it for you.
So get busy
equipyourcommunity.org/loved

[Notes]
while I encourage you to seek out pastors or Christian leaders to help and support you like Thomas did us
Thomas was the exception rather than the rule
He was uncommon
don't wait around for help
Because by the time help comes, it might be too late

but while I can’t guarantee your church leaders will be able to help you
If you’re interested in starting something like this
I would be more than happy to support you from a distance
To coach you through different stages
To be for you what Thomas was for us

If you’d like any support, go to equipyourcommunity.org/loved to let me know and we’ll go from there










Church leaders, it’s your job.

It has been since the beginning. Caring for celibate women was the impetus for the first organized church leadership.
So get busy

[Notes]
Last, I want to speak to pastors and Christian leaders in the room
Because we desperately need you to up-skill and quickly

And before you say it isn’t your job
Answer this question: What was the first administrative act of the church?
When the community of believers started getting too big to just run organically on good vibes and good intentions
When the Church had to start dealing with the daily reality of scarcity
What did the Church do?

It provided for celibate women

Acts 6 verses 1-7 describes a scene where
Immigrant widows were being accidentally neglected
the love of Jesus was drawing unmarried people to the church—thank the Lord!
But the need had become too great to be met organically
And too great for those called to primarily preach/teach to also take care of these celibate women
But they recognized that it was the responsibility of the Church
So they empowered other leaders to take care of these practical responsibilities
And they resourced that work

Then fast forward to 1 Tim 5
Paul is talking about the proper care of widows
And what do we see?
A house of widows, the beginnings of one of these city celibate homes, a place where celibate women are finding family!
And while Paul is holding some of those women accountable for unfaithfulness and offering some lesser-of-two-evils-accommodations
Topline he’s still affirming that it would be best if they kept their commitments to permanent celibacy and family together in the house of widows

Clearly the Church had by 1 Tim 5 made good on its commitment in Acts 6 to provide for widows, for celibate women,
not only to have food, but to have a home and a family

That was the first administrative act of the church
It’s what leads to establishing the first generation of church leaders after the apostles
Providing for celibate people is what the Church was created to do








Cast vision/inspire the idea
Offer theological and practical resources
Coach through organizational development
Help with interpersonal challenges and spiritual attack
Host + lead commitment ceremonies in your church
So get busy

[Notes]
So get busy helping us!

Perhaps you could do what my pastor did

he honored the reality that the Church wasn't doing it's part
freed us to build what we needed
inspired the idea
pointed us to theological and practical resources
coached us through interpersonal challenges, spiritual attack, and administrative questions
helped us write our community covenant
let us have commitment ceremonies in his church, wore his collar and gave a homily and laid hands on us

cried with us when it was tough
prayed for us
And gave us courage and hope when we had none left







Cast vision for intentional Christian community to everyone
Gather singles and incubate community
Expect it to be messy
So get busy
equipyourcommunity.org/loved

[Notes]
But can I challenge you to go even further than my pastor did?

cast vision for intentional Christian community to everyone in your church

gather singles and lead them in incubating community
Don’t wait for them to come to you

and expect it to be messy

But you don’t have to do it alone
Helping churches offer vocational singles lifelong, lived-in family is exactly what Equip, the ministry that I run, does
Plus we resource churches like yours on how to teach about LGBT+ topics, offer better pastoral care to LGBT+ people, and teach parents to lead kids in age-appropriate conversations about sexual sexual stewardship for all people

If you’re interested in more info, go to equipyourcommunity.org/loved and let me know if you’d like to connect about ways Equip can support your church



IMAGINE


[Notes]
I want to close with an encouragement
By imagining a future Church where celibate Christians are finding real family
Living in families with other vocational singles
And with married people and their kids

Imagine how the testimony of their faithfulness in vocational singleness might expose the idol of romance
Imagine how much kingdom work they could do when they’re thriving instead of struggling to survive
Imagine them healing their communities by attending to wealth inequality, racial division, homelessness, mental illness, and a lack of care for immigrants and refugees. 
Imagine them helping married people raise their kids and helping lead our churches
Imagine them showing us what it means to enjoy family in the body of Christ and giving all of us hope for how we’ll enjoy family in the New Heavens and New Earth

And imagine how all of this would bring the gospel alive for those curious about Jesus
And draw people to Him
Because a meaningful minority of Christians are willing to give some of the things our world today says are most valuable
and instead spend their lives healing the wounds of others
All because they really believe that Jesus is who He says He is
And that the truest life, the fullest life is found laboring shoulder to shoulder next to Him


QUESTIONS

