


Facilitated by Pieter Valk of
Session Topic: Sexuality
Diversity & Inclusion Training



Our Goal
To explore language and terminology around sexuality so there is shared, value-neutral vocabulary for conversation






MY STORY




Catch me up
Fill me in on what you have done up until now. What have you enjoyed most? What has been most helpful/challenging?






Catch me up
What have been some real-life interactions over the past few months where what you have learned in these trainings has been relevant? 






Catch me up
How did Welcoming Week go? What were some challenges? Celebrations?






Our Goal
To explore language and terminology around sexuality so there is shared, value-neutral vocabulary for conversation






Clarifications
What is my role? To ask questions
Focus on sexuality, save gender for future conversation
We aren’t here to debate






Share
Why does conversation about sexuality seem to be more challenging than conversation about race, religion, gender equality, disability, income, etc.?






Share
Why is finding the right terms and definitions so difficult?

What are some of your fears and resistance to this conversation specifically about language and semantics? 







Clarification
By agreeing to use this vocabulary in this conversation, you are not affirming that they are the best terms and definitions or any associated ideas/beliefs/people/experiences. 






Terms + Definitions
What terms were you familiar with? Unfamiliar with?
What terms would you have a different definition for? The same definition?
How have some of these words been used to hurt people?
Do any specific experiences come up when you think about these words/definitions?






BREAK




Term-mirroring
Listen to terms another uses and how they use them (or ask)
Mirror those terms with those definitions as a show of respect






Member Interactions
In your interactions with members, who has more power/influence?

If you are interacting with a member with different beliefs than you and who is using language you find offensive, combative, shaming, elitist, or politically loaded, how might you respond? What is your role? What isn’t?  






What are some others situations that might arise with members where this specific training would be relevant? What are some productive ways that you could respond?



Member Interactions



Wrap-up
What are your take-away’s from our conversation today?

What further conversation would you like to have? What questions are you left with that you would like to spend future time on? 






QUESTIONS?




Facilitated by Pieter Valk of
Session Topic: Sexuality
Diversity & Inclusion Training
