Ministering to LGBT+ People

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
PIETER
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a historic sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University,
studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

When I use the word gay to describe myself or others,
I’m merely using that word to refer to the fact that
people experience same-sex attraction, nothing more.
I’m not using it to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or relationship status, either one way or another.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what we mean when we use the words we do today.

Second, a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
so last time we explored how we can think compassionately about sexual ethics
and cast a vision for thriving in our churches
today I want to continue by addressing some of the toughest questions that come up in discipleship
the big questions

[Notes]
I want to be clear: We’re not offering responses to these questions so you can go find the gay people in your community and tell them the answers,
But I’m pretty confident that none of y’all would actually do that…
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when gay people raise them.
Or, you might even have a gay person in your community asking you to lead them in making sense of their faith and sexuality.
In that case, you can create space for these questions, listen well, and help the gay people in your community think well about them.
Pastoral Care Question 1
How do I know what God's wisdom is? Did Jesus even talk about gay people? Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

We discover God’s best for us by reading His Scriptures with the historic Church.

[Notes]
here’s our first tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

How do I know what God's wisdom is?
Did Jesus even talk about gay people?
Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

Here’s how I’d respond:
I believe God made the world perfectly, He gave us choice, and then humans chose to disobey Him. 
Our sin bent everything about the world, yet God looked back at the world, He noticed what would bring us harm,
but he also noticed the ways His best still shined through.

So He revealed to us in His Scripture what would bring us harm and what His best still is for us,
and He gave us the Church to read and interpret the Scriptures with

Whenever a Christian asks a question about morality, the right question to ask isn’t, “What can I get away with?”
Instead, it’s “What is God’s best for me?”
And we answer that question by studying His Scriptures
and discovering whether there’s a historic Christian consensus or a contemporary global Christian consensus on the question 

let me pause there
because I think it’s really important to name that
and be intellectually honest with ourselves and those we’re discipling

you see, I grew up being taught that God’s wisdom in Scripture is self-evident to every Bible-believing Christian
and we’ll all come to the same conclusions

but when I got to college at a top 15 university,
I met smart, Jesus-loving people in college who had different interpretations of scripture
this was disorienting for sexual ethics
but more importantly, for my whole understanding of the scriptures and God’s wisdom and faith

crisis of faith: how do we know God’s wisdom? can we know God’s wisdom? is God even real?

some say HS, but God can’t be of two minds
not self-evident
human interpretation unavoidable
pope in rome or a pope in the mirrow (or something in between)

so studied all the in-betweens
and struck by the fact that Jesus told us he would give us the Church,
led by his Apostles and their successors, to teach the scriptures and lead his people

and that for a vast majority of Christian history, every Christian believed that the church leaders
who could trace their authority back to the Apostles
were the imperfect leaders God had given us to interpret the Scriptures for us
not that they would always teach perfectly
or that any one of them had the secret sauce

but when there’s a strong consensus among the successors of the Apostles,
yet I arrive at a different conclusion, I’m almost certainly wrong

that if I default to the interpretations of the historic Church, the Great Tradition
and make decisions in my life in light of that wisdom
(and still wrestle with my doubts about whether the historic Church is right)
then my life, on average, will be much better than if I just followed my own wisdom

maybe the story is different for you
but however you interpret the scriptures, I think it’s important to be honest with yourself and those you disciple what you’re leaning on
Pastoral Care Question 1
The whole of Scripture reveals God’s best for everyone’s sexuality: vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

We just need to read the words of Jesus.

[Notes]
okay, so if Christians should be approaching the Scriptures and asking “What’s God’s best for gay people?”
what do we find?

well, we don’t even need to look at the verses that many believe call same-sex sexuality activity a sin.
They are meaningful evidence, but I don’t think they’re necessary to know God’s wisdom for my sexuality.

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not those few passages, but the whole of Scripture.
Consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives,
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness.
When it comes to what to do with our capacities for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear.
There are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

To arrive at that, we just need to read the words of Jesus…
Pastoral Care Question 1
In Matthew 19, Jesus defines marriage as a lifetime commitment between one woman and one man to serve God.

Then Jesus offers the alternative of lifetime abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

[Notes]
In twelve verses in Matthew 19, Jesus tells us everything we need to know

Jesus calls His people back to God’s original intentions for marriage
A lifelong marriage between one woman and one man to serve God, not themselves

And then Jesus introduces an alternative
Permanently giving up romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention

Those are God’s best for us
Christian marriage or vocational singleness
Regardless of sexual orientation

That’s what a vast majority of Christians have believe over the past 2,000 years
And that’s what the majority of global Christians believe today
Pastoral Care Question 1
Love = Willing the good of the other
Love = Empathy + Wisdom
Empathy – Wisdom ≠ Love
Wisdom – Empathy ≠ Love

[Notes]
Now some would respond, “But a loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage”

The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,”
that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that.

It’s saying that God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest.
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is.

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer.
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers.
How do we know what God wants to offer us? By reading the Scriptures with the historic Church!

But it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things.
We have to help people take hold of them.
We have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive.

So love = empathy + wisdom
empathy without wisdom isn’t love
wisdom without empathy isn’t love

If we want to imitate God and love people,
we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to His wisdom and help them do so
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first. Don’t expect gay Christians to follow God’s wisdom until you’ve made thriving accessible.
Pastoral Care Question 2

[Notes]
here’s our next tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse. Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.
They can’t begin to accept the historic Christian sexual ethic until they’ve accepted Jesus as savior, king, and lord.

If the LGBT+ person is a Christian but isn’t convinced of a historic sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned them to loneliness if committed to celibacy.


Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?
Pastoral Care Question 2

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Being a winsome witness
Recognize the sins of the Church
Offer clarity as a form of charity
Publicly commit to doing better
Cultivate thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
Call straight people to sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.

[Notes]
In the meantime, what can we do?
How can we offer a winsome witness on these topics in progressive environments?

First, recognize the sins of Christians in the past.
In particular, pray the gay away solutions, double standards for sexual ethics, paltry support of celibacy, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate.
Don’t be afraid to apologize. Not for holding a historic sexual ethic, but for the ways Christians over the past century have sinned against gay people.

Second, offer clarity as a form of charity.
Be clear about what you understand God’s wisdom to be for sexual stewardship. Share your understanding in a humble way.

Third, publicly commit to doing better and taking practical steps.
Be explicit. Tell them what your church is going to do differently. And then do it!

In particular (fourth), I’d encourage you to take the steps necessary to support gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
in ways that actually bear undeniably good fruit. Realize that vision for a thriving community that we explored earlier.

And fifth, call straight people to a high standard of sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.
When we hold straight people to a lower standard of sexual stewardship than gay people, we lose credibility and hurt straight people.
And vocational singleness won’t be viable for gay people until a meaningful minority of straight people are accepting God’s call to commit to a lifetime of singleness for the sake of God’s kingdom.

So keep meeting with those who doubt God’s love or the wisdom of a historic Christian sexual ethic.
And outside of those conversations, get busy pushing your community to become a place where gay Christians could actually thrive according to God's wisdom.

Pastoral Care Question 3
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
how about this third set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 3
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 3
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 3
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 4
Did God intend for me to be gay? Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.

[Notes]
question four:

Did God intend for me to be gay?
Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Well, as I understand it, Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God does not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction
or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.

Yet I experience same-sex attractions,
so clearly God allowed it, even if it wasn’t his intentions for me!
How does that make sense?
We’ll come back to that…
Pastoral Care Question 4
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall.

All of us were corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us.

[Notes]
What, then, are same-sex attractions?

Well, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall.

I believe that when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world,
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.

None of us are how God intended.
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin.

So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction.

But because I was born into a broken world,
one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a brokenness and temptation, but it is not a sin.

While we don’t choose who we’re attracted to, we do choose how we steward our desires.

[Notes]
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Yet while we don’t choose who we are attracted to, 
We do choose how we respond.
Every person is responsible for stewarding their sexuality in God-honoring ways, regardless of their sexual orientation.
Share
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

[Notes]
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

Pastoral Care Question 5
Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

God has the power to do miracles, and scientific studies have shown sexual orientation change efforts to be harmfully ineffective.

[Notes]
maybe you’ll be asked this fifth tough question:

Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

Here’s how I’d respond:

I want to be clear: there is no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
There’s no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation.

Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts
experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts).

Pastoral Care Question 5
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when asked, how is that fair?

Why do bad things happen to innocent people?

[Notes]
Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:

If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing,
how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: Why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation.
They’re innocent.
So why?

Pastoral Care Question 5
For our choices to love God and each other to matter, God chooses to allow the consequences of our decisions to play out (including our mistaken decisions).

[Notes]
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
It’s the theological concept of free process.

If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choice?
No

So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something,
God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Same-sex attractions develop because of the sins of others, going all the way back to Adam and Eve.

To protect free will, God allows people to develop same-sex attractions.

[Notes]
How do I think that applies to broken sexuality?

I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others.

Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations, going all the way back to Adam and Even.
Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.
There is no evidence that less-than-ideal parenting or sexual abuse increases a person’s likelihood of developing same-sex attractions.

But then to protect my free will,
God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Yet, God has promised to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good!

[Notes]
Thankfully, God has promised us
(and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good.

It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our sixth set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 6
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
As I’ve already shard, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a revisionist sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 6
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 7
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
seventh:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 7
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 7
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 7
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 7
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 7
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.
Pastoral Care Question 8
Should I call myself gay? How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Practice term-mirroring as hospitality. Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior. Create space for Christians to use the word “gay”.

[Notes]
and last but not least:

Should I call myself gay?
How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Particularly in conversation with LGBT+ non-Christians or when first meeting LGBT+ Christians,choose to mirror their terminology as an act of hospitality.
Instead of letting language be an early barrier to conversation, ask them what words they use to describe themselves,
ask what those words mean to them, and then choose to use those words with those definitions in conversation.
This doesn’t mean you’re affirming their use of that word or that definition.
Rather, you’re choosing to defer to them in that space so that you can focus on much more important topics.

Conflation of attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior is often a source of disagreement about language.
Instead, distinguish between the four different aspects of sexuality, like we discussed earlier

Next, create space for students to use the word “gay.”
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage.
There is no perfect term for ministering to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay young adults in your ministry, and straight culture warriors among your donors and alumni.
I choose the word most effective with gay teens and young adults and then make clear what I mean.

I think it’s important to distinguish between using the word “gay” phenomenologically versus ontologically.
I am using “gay” phenomenologically, not ontologically.
When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based one one’s experience or what it appears to be.
In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design.
When I use the word “gay,” I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay.
I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay.
I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same sex, and using the word “gay” is, in my opinion, the best word to describe that experience.

Finally, when I use the word “gay,'“ I am ultimately taking advantage of an opportunity to share the gospel.
I say, “I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
With this, I communicate that I am a child of God, first and foremost.
Jesus, and Jesus alone, sits on the throne of my life.
And I experience same-sex attraction.
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world.
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences.
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences.
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences.
I use the word “gay” to identify with people, not to identify with sin.
questions?
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
