Ministering to LGBT+ People

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
PIETER
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 30,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a historic sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University,
studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

When I use the word gay to describe myself or others,
I’m merely using that word to refer to the fact that
people experience same-sex attraction, nothing more.
I’m not using it to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or relationship status, either one way or another.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what we mean when we use the words we do today.

Second, a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic

In terms of my personal life
while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.

but I knew I didn’t a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
So I asked my pastor at the time, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus six of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.

I’ve actually made lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to this family,
and I know who some of the guys are who will see my ugliest parts but won’t run away,
who I’ll grow old with,
and who will hold my hand when the people we love pass.
We love gay people, and we’re convinced God has something better to offer gay people than gay marriage.

How do we make sure our churches actually become places of thriving?
God’s Love & Wisdom

[Notes]
there’s also a part of my story that I think a lot of you could resonate with

My parents were married in an Episcopal Church
I was baptized and confirmed in that church
I spent the first twelve years of my life going to that church
My father served on the vestry in that church
Then the Episcopal Church ordained a bishop persisting in unrepentant same-sex romantic and sexual activity, and my family left.

At the same time, as the loudest voices on different extremes argued about God’s love for gay people,
I was slowly becoming aware of my own same-sex attractions, and I was terrified.
I was terrified that progressive voices on one extreme would push me to disobey God’s teachings,
and I was terrified that traditional voices on another extreme would add to the deep shame I already felt.

Interestingly, our family actually went to a conservative Methodist church after that,
which in many ways was a blessing to me

The congregations that would become the ACNA endured decades of TEC slowly (or not so slowly) abandoning orthodoxy on many fronts,
but sexual ethics served as the breaking point.
At least in the eyes of this cradle Anglican,
a belief that God had something better to offer gay people than gay marriage was at the very center of the ACNA’s origins
So fulfilling our commitment to offering gay people a viable path for thriving according to God’s wisdom is central to our credibility
To put it simply, many people have been waiting to see if we meant what we promised or if we just didn’t like gay people

Does that seem familiar?
Particularly in light of the recent Richard Hays news?

My hunch is, there’s gay people in your life that you love deeply
you’re not where you are because you hate gay people
you’re here because you love gay people
and like me, you’re convinced that God has something better to offer gay people than gay marriage
so what does God want to offer?
and how can we, the next generation of leaders in our denominations,
make sure we’re become known for more than just talk
but we actually embody historic sexual ethics God’s wisdom in our churches
in ways that lead to undeniable flourishing in the lives of gay Christians following God’s wisdom in our churches
God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
to answer that question, we’re going to explore three things today

first, I want to share with you how we can make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion

second, I want to cast a vision for becoming churches where gay Christians thrive according to God’s wisdom

and then I want to conclude with some exploration of how we can respond to some of the toughest questions
that come up in discipleship with empathy and care
what do I believe?

[Notes]
so first, how can we make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion?

I want to model that by sharing with you what I understand to be God’s wisdom for my life
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons

To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch

For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions

For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a historic sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different.

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems

Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways
that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity

What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible

Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions
or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture,
but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions:
no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out

How does that apply to broken sexuality?
I believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God
and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a revisionist sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction
Share
What did you find helpful about this articulation of God’s wisdom? Challenging?
How is this different than ways you’ve shared about God’s wisdom in the past?

[Notes]
PIETER
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
PIETER

In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a lifetime committed singleness
where one gives up romance and marriage and sex
to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out

And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage
as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman
for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question,
“What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear:
vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
unfortunately, most of my gay Christian friends who have abandoned historic sexual ethics
for an ethic that condoned gay sex eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them have followed a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

So yeah, I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that historic sexual ethics is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, the gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a historic sexual ethic, too
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic are lonely,
struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon historic Christian sexual ethics because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic




God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
so how?

the solution

[Notes]
how can our churches becomes places where gay Christians thrive according to God’s wisdom?
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support
And look the other way when straight Christians
casually engage in romance
have sex outside of marriage
Suffer from near-ubiquitous pornography addiction
unthinkingly refuse an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage
and engage in unbiblical divorce/remarriage
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people
can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort

Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics,
but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.

They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.

But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.

Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.
Share
How might people at your church respond to this nuanced presentation of God’s wisdom for gay people? What would they find compelling? Lacking?
God’s Love & Wisdom
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
A vision for thriving in our churches according to God’s wisdom
Responding to tough questions in discipleship with empathy

[Notes]
so we’ve explored how we can think compassionately about sexual ethics
and cast a vision for thriving in our churches
I want to wrap up our time together by addressing some of the toughest questions that come up in discipleship
the big questions

[Notes]
I want to be clear: We’re not offering responses to these questions so you can go find the gay people in your community and tell them the answers,
But I’m pretty confident that none of y’all would actually do that…
Instead, I raise these questions so that you can feel comfortable in these conversations when gay people raise them.
Or, you might even have a gay person in your community asking you to lead them in making sense of their faith and sexuality.
In that case, you can create space for these questions, listen well, and help the gay people in your community think well about them.
Pastoral Care Question 1
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
here’s a first set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 1
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 1
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 1
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 2
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our second set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 2
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
As I’ve already shard, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a revisionist sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 2
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 3
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
here’s our third set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 3
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 3
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 3
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 3
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 3
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Should I call myself gay? How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Practice term-mirroring as hospitality. Distinguish between attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior. Create space for Christians to use the word “gay”.

[Notes]
here’s our fourt set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:
Should I call myself gay?
How can SSA Christians refer to themselves?

Particularly in conversation with LGBT+ non-Christians or when first meeting LGBT+ Christians,choose to mirror their terminology as an act of hospitality.
Instead of letting language be an early barrier to conversation, ask them what words they use to describe themselves,
ask what those words mean to them, and then choose to use those words with those definitions in conversation.
This doesn’t mean you’re affirming their use of that word or that definition.
Rather, you’re choosing to defer to them in that space so that you can focus on much more important topics.

Conflation of attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior is often a source of disagreement about language.
Instead, distinguish between the four different aspects of sexuality, like we discussed earlier

Next, create space for students to use the word “gay.”
The reality is, both the word “gay” and the phrase “same-sex attraction” are unclear and carry baggage.
There is no perfect term for ministering to LGBT+ non-Christians, gay young adults in your ministry, and straight culture warriors among your donors and alumni.
I choose the word most effective with gay teens and young adults and then make clear what I mean.

I think it’s important to distinguish between using the word “gay” phenomenologically versus ontologically.
I am using “gay” phenomenologically, not ontologically.
When we define something phenomenologically, we are naming something based one one’s experience or what it appears to be.
In contrast, when we ask who a person is ontologically, we are asking who they are innately, by design.
When I use the word “gay,” I am not saying that I or someone else is ontologically gay.
I am not saying that I am a fundamentally different person or that God designed me to be gay.
I am merely noticing that I am attracted to other people of the same sex, and using the word “gay” is, in my opinion, the best word to describe that experience.

Finally, when I use the word “gay,'“ I am ultimately taking advantage of an opportunity to share the gospel.
I say, “I am a Christian. I am gay. And I am convinced that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex, including me.”
With this, I communicate that I am a child of God, first and foremost.
Jesus, and Jesus alone, sits on the throne of my life.
And I experience same-sex attraction.
That has significantly impacted my journey and how I see the world.
It has connected me with others who have similar experiences.
And I think I have something to offer the Church particularly because of my experiences.
For those reasons I identify as gay to identify with others with similar experiences.
I use the word “gay” to identify with people, not to identify with sin.
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first. Don’t expect gay Christians to follow God’s wisdom until you’ve made thriving accessible.
Pastoral Care Question 5

[Notes]
and here’s our last tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse. Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.
They can’t begin to accept the historic Christian sexual ethic until they’ve accepted Jesus as savior, king, and lord.

If the LGBT+ person is a Christian but isn’t convinced of a historic sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned them to loneliness if committed to celibacy.


Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?
Pastoral Care Question 5

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Being a winsome witness
Recognize the sins of the Church
Offer clarity as a form of charity
Publicly commit to doing better
Cultivate thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
Call straight people to sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.

[Notes]
In the meantime, what can we do?
How can we offer a winsome witness on these topics in progressive environments?

First, recognize the sins of Christians in the past.
In particular, pray the gay away solutions, double standards for sexual ethics, paltry support of celibacy, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate.
Don’t be afraid to apologize. Not for holding a historic sexual ethic, but for the ways Christians over the past century have sinned against gay people.

Second, offer clarity as a form of charity.
Be clear about what you understand God’s wisdom to be for sexual stewardship. Share your understanding in a humble way.

Third, publicly commit to doing better and taking practical steps.
Be explicit. Tell them what your church is going to do differently. And then do it!

In particular (fourth), I’d encourage you to take the steps necessary to support gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
in ways that actually bear undeniably good fruit. Realize that vision for a thriving community that we explored earlier.

And fifth, call straight people to a high standard of sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.
When we hold straight people to a lower standard of sexual stewardship than gay people, we lose credibility and hurt straight people.
And vocational singleness won’t be viable for gay people until a meaningful minority of straight people are accepting God’s call to commit to a lifetime of singleness for the sake of God’s kingdom.

So keep meeting with those who doubt God’s love or the wisdom of a historic Christian sexual ethic.
And outside of those conversations, get busy pushing your community to become a place where gay Christians could actually thrive according to God's wisdom.

questions?
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
