Offering God’s  Wisdom & Grace to Gay People

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is a leading coaching and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where LGBT+ Christians thrive according to historic sexual ethics.

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350+ trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
PIETER
Equip is a leading coaching and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where LGBT+ Christians thrive according to historic sexual ethics. 

Trained over 35,000 Christian leaders in 350+ trainings at 100 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/diaconate explorer in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a historic sexual ethic
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and diaconate explorer in the Anglican Church in North America
 
I’m a founding member of am intentional Christian community for men committed to vocational singleness
called the Nashville Family of Brothers
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University,
studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

When I use the word gay to describe myself or others,
I’m merely using that word to refer to the fact that
people experience same-sex attraction, nothing more.
I’m not using it to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or relationship status, either one way or another.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what we mean when we use the words we do today.

Second, a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me horrible stereotypes of gay people
so I didn’t think I belonged among gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic

In terms of my personal life
while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.

but I knew I didn’t a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
So I asked my pastor at the time, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus four of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
I hope it shows that I’m richly blessed by God and deeply grateful
with the help of the Holy Spirit, I’ve been able to find a way to walk out historic sexual ethics
in a way that is truly life-giving and worth it for me!my hunch is, many of you want that same thing for your friends and family members who experience same-sex attraction
so let’s explore that:
How can we share about God’s wisdom and grace with gay people?

God’s Wisdom & Grace
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
Engaging in conversation about LGBT+ topics
Caring for adult LGBT+ loved ones
Ensuring the next generation embraces God’s wisdom and grace

[Notes]
to answer that question, we’re going to explore four things today

first, I want to share with you how we can make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion

second, I’ll offer suggestions for how all of us engage in conversation about LGBT+ topics, particularly when the environment feels suspicious or hostile

third, I’ll share how parents and friends of adult LGBT+ kids can make the most of their circumstances and best care for their LGBT+ loved ones

and last but not least, I’ll share how parents of young kids can make sure every kid know about God’s love and wisdom and feels safe to share with their parents no matter what they’re struggling with
what do I believe?

[Notes]
so first, how can we make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion?

I want to model that by sharing with you what I understand to be God’s wisdom for my life
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons

To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch

For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions

For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a historic sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different.

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems

Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways
that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity

What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible

Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions
or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture,
but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions:
no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out

How does that apply to broken sexuality?
I believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God
and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness
(defined as a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(defined as a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a revisionist sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
PIETER

In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a lifetime committed singleness
where one gives up romance and marriage and sex
to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out

And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage
as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman
for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question,
“What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear:
vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
unfortunately, most of my gay Christian friends who have abandoned historic sexual ethics
for an ethic that condoned gay sex eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them have followed a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

So yeah, I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that historic sexual ethics is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, the gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a historic sexual ethic, too
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic are lonely,
struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon historic Christian sexual ethics because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic




God’s Wisdom & Grace
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
Engaging in conversation about LGBT+ topics
Caring for adult LGBT+ loved ones
Ensuring the next generation embraces God’s wisdom and grace

[Notes]
now that we’ve explored how you can make sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion

Let’s talk about how you can engage in conversation about LGBT+ topics, particularly when the environment feels suspicious or hostile
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first. Don’t expect gay Christians to follow God’s wisdom until you’ve made thriving accessible.
Winsome Engagement

[Notes]
to distill this down, let’s imaging you’re talking to an LGBT+ person
or an enthusiastic straight ally
and they push back on your beliefs with something like this:
I’m not sure I even believe in Jesus. Why should I believe your bigoted, outdated views on sexuality?

How can you respond winsomely?

Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
Don't put the cart before the horse. Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.
They can’t begin to accept the historic Christian sexual ethic until they’ve accepted Jesus as savior, king, and lord.


Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?
Winsome Engagement

[Notes]
If the LGBT+ person is a Christian but isn’t convinced of a historic sexual ethic,
any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.

Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Being a winsome witness
Recognize the sins of the Church
Offer clarity as a form of charity
Publicly commit to doing better
Cultivate thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
Call straight people to sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.

[Notes]
In general, what can churches to do offer a winsome witness on these topics in progressive environments?

First, recognize the sins of Christians in the past.
In particular, pray the gay away solutions, double standards for sexual ethics, paltry support of celibacy, and sometimes overt homophobia and hate.
Don’t be afraid to apologize. Not for holding a historic sexual ethic, but for the ways Christians over the past century have sinned against gay people.

Second, offer clarity as a form of charity.
Be clear about what you understand God’s wisdom to be for sexual stewardship. Share your understanding in a humble way.

Third, publicly commit to doing better and taking practical steps.
Be explicit. Tell them what your church is going to do differently. And then do it!

In particular (fourth), I’d encourage you to take the steps necessary to support gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic
in ways that actually bear undeniably good fruit. Realize that vision for a thriving community that we explored earlier.

And fifth, call straight people to a high standard of sexual stewardship and to consider vocational singleness.
When we hold straight people to a lower standard of sexual stewardship than gay people, we lose credibility and hurt straight people.
And vocational singleness won’t be viable for gay people until a meaningful minority of straight people are accepting God’s call to commit to a lifetime of singleness for the sake of God’s kingdom.

So keep meeting with those who doubt God’s love or the wisdom of a historic Christian sexual ethic.
And outside of those conversations, get busy pushing your community to become a place where gay Christians could actually thrive according to God's wisdom.

God’s Wisdom & Grace
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
Engaging in conversation about LGBT+ topics
Caring for adult LGBT+ loved ones
Ensuring the next generation embraces God’s wisdom and grace

[Notes]
now, for those of you who are parents and friends of adult LGBT+ kids
how can you make the most of their circumstances and best care for their LGBT+ loved ones?
particularly if your LGBT+ loved one has been on the same journey as many of my friends
and out of their pain, have left the faith
Know that you did the best you could and give yourself space to mourn
Pray for a miracle
Do what you can
Change your church for the next generation
Parents of LGBT+ Adults

[Notes]
I’ve got four suggestions for you:
Know that you did the best you could and give yourself space to mourn
Pray for a miracle
Do what you can, AND
Change your church for the next generation

First, 
It’s not your fault

It’s not your fault that your child is gay. 
There is no scientific evidence for the theories that less-than-perfect relationships with parents leads to people developing same-sex attractions. 
Regardless of how good of a parent you were, your kid was going to one day realize they are experience attractions to people of the same-sex. 

Two, it’s not your fault that you didn’t have what you needed as a parent.
Your parents didn’t have these conversations with you. 
No one handed you a book when your kid was born to teach you how to have conversations about sexuality and sexual attraction. 
Your pastor didn’t sit you down when your first kid was five years old and prepare you to say and do what you needed to for your teen to share earlier and with different results. 
Your parents or your pastors should have prepared you for this, but they didn’t.

My guess is that you did the best with what you had. 
You’d probably be the first to admit that that wasn’t good enough. 

Yet, even though you did the best with what you had at the time, you’re still starting from behind, and you feel like you’re in a race to save your kid. 
There is a lot of pain that can’t be undone. 
The Enemy has been conspiring carefully and cleverly for a long time. 
You’re not overreacting; this is not the way it’s supposed to be. It hurts. 

So feel it. Feel your feelings. 
Talk to your spouse or a close friend. 
Find other parents of gay teens and adults to connect with. 
Do some processing with your therapist. 

Don’t be surprised if at times you want to avoid the reality, or you are angry, or you just feel numb. 
Those feelings are normal. 
Don’t be surprised if, as you learn more and appreciate the pain of your child and this conspiracy of sin against your family, 
each step of deeper understanding brings a new wave of pain. 

And last, and very importantly, please don’t mourn in front of your teen or adult child. 
Your child is hurting enough, and if they see you mourning, that might add to their feelings of shame. 
It’s easy for a teen or adult child to see you hurting and think, “I did this. They’re hurting because I’m gay. It’s my fault.” 
So protect your child from that by mourning privately with a spouse or close friend or support group or therapist.

Second, pray for a miracle.

When I meet with parents of gay teens or young adults who are five years behind, 
their teen or young adult has often walked away from the faith (or seems to be walking away) 
because of the pain they’ve experienced around faith and sexuality. 
These parents often ask, “How can I save my kid?”

I often respond with something like this: 
“I wish I could reassure you with a list of guaranteed steps for making all of this right, but I can’t. 
My consistent experience with parents in your circumstance is that it’s going to take a miraculous movement of the Holy Spirit 
or your kid hitting a painful rock bottom for your child to even consider returning to the faith. 
And I hate that. 
I really wish I could promise you something different, but I can’t.”

No parent wishes that their child will have a painful, rock-bottom experience. 
So pray for a miracle, recognizing that you are starting from behind and feel like you’re in a race to save your kid. 

Pray that the Holy Spirit, in His infinite power, would overwhelm the barriers and entrenchments in your child’s heart 
established by years of pain and lie after lie from the Enemy. 

Pray that God would speak to your teen in an undeniable way and comfort them that He is real, He loves them, and He is worth following, 
even when it seems painful and unfair. Pray for a miracle.

And at the same time, I want to encourage you to hold this hope for a miracle in a healthy way. 
Recognize that, much more often than not, miracles don’t happen. 
I don’t know why, but God usually doesn’t choose to work through miracles. 
I say this because I fear for your spiritual health if your belief in God and God’s love for you or your teen becomes dependent on whether He provides this miracle. 

And believe me, gay people know this danger well. 
Many tied their belief in God’s love to God miraculously removing their same-sex attractions. 
When it didn’t happen, they were devastated, and their faith was often shattered. 
So beg for a miracle. 
But it’s probably best for your spiritual health and your child’s spiritual health if you prepare for no miracle.

Which brings us to the third point: Do what you can

Expect your teen to give you little grace because they are hurting, and choose to endure it instead of reciprocating.
I’ve shared that it’s not your fault that you’re behind, that no one taught you what you needed to know,
that you probably did the best with what you had, and it probably still wasn’t enough, and that it hurt your child. 
And it will probably be a long time until your kid can recognize all of this and give you grace. 

So in the near future, don’t expect any. 
Expect your child to lash out in their pain and probably hurt you. 
And please, choose to endure it without reciprocating. 
Choose to imitate our Savior by taking on punishment for sins you did not commit as an act of love toward your child.

Get educated!
On average, teens wait five years after realizing they are gay to tell a parent, 
and they’ve spent those five years pondering and reading and researching and arguing in their head and with people on the internet. 
They know their stuff. 
And remember, you’re starting from behind. 
So don’t pick fights about Scripture or theology or science or statistics, because you will probably lose; their arguments will be too well-rehearsed. 
Instead, get educated.

Check out the free articles and premium on-demand video resources that Equip offers
Check out books by Wesley Hill and Mark Yarhouse and Laurie Krieg.
At the end, they’ll be a chance for you to give me your email address, and I can send you a full resource recommendations list.

And last but not least: change your church for the next generation

This one is painful and important.
You are starting from behind.
A miracle is unlikely.
You’ve got a lot to learn.

And unfortunately for many parents I’ve met with, they get to a point where their gay teen has grown up, 
is now in college in another state or has a job and their own home, perhaps in a different city. 

The parents don’t have as much influence on their child as they used to. 
Opportunities to have an impact don’t come as often. 
They haven’t given up on their child, but they are accepting how powerless they have become to change their child. 
Yet, many have chosen to use their story and their hard-earned wisdom and expertise to make a difference.

Maybe you can’t go back in time and change your family’s story, 
but you can get involved in your local church and change the stories of other families. 
How? 

You can teach young parents what you wish you had known. 
You can give back in support groups for parents who have just learned their kid is gay. 
You can urge your pastors to get the training they need to prepare parents. 
You can pressure your church to take practical steps to become a place where the next generation of gay teens thrive according to God’s wisdom. 
For many of these parents, this doesn’t change their family’s story, but taking action feels like they’re honoring their story. 
It makes meaning out of the pain, and there’s great comfort in that.
God’s Wisdom & Grace
Making sense of broken sexuality with nuance and compassion
Engaging in conversation about LGBT+ topics
Caring for adult LGBT+ loved ones
Ensuring the next generation embraces God’s wisdom and grace

[Notes]
which brings us to our last chunk before Q&A
how can parents of young kids make sure every kid know about God’s love and wisdom and feels safe to share with their parents no matter what they’re struggling with?
Consider learning with Equip’s Parent Course
12 on-demand video sessions
Equipping to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for sexuality and gender
Practical guides for dialogue, broken down by age group
Don’t wait until it’s too late!

[Notes]
Many parents wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, 
often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, 
abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.

If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, parents have got to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.

So that if teens notice same-sex attractions, they’ll share with parents early,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

There’s lots of great resources for parents out there
but my coworker, Amber Carroll, has developed what I think is the BEST resource for parents of young kids

she’s an expert in this stuff
she’s a mom her self of two kids
and her family’s story has forced her to have these conversations with her kids earlier that she would have liked
she was also a high school English teacher

from all of that experience and 100s of hours of study, she’s developed Equip’s Parent Course
it’s a 12-session, on-demand video course that
Equips parents of kids ages 2-12 with a deep familiarity with God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people
AND Provides practical guides for age-appropriate conversation with kids, broken down by age group

You can get access at equipyourcommunity.org/parentcourse
Or if enough of you are interested, maybe we can get a group of parents from your church to go through the course together as a cohort, and Amber can personally join for some of the teaching and to help you externally process tough questions that come up

questions?

[Notes]
How can you respond with the love, wisdom, and patience of Jesus when a student comes out to you?

 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
