

Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic published in places like Christianity Today and for over 65 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip—the premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
We’ve trained over 30,000 Christian leaders
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to kingdom singleness
 
And I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to be because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic
What do I mean when I say “a traditional sexual ethic”?






Traditional sexual ethic:
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom


What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

[Notes]
Beyond the obvious
Love, compassion, empathy, care, kindness, etc.

What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

Today I want to answer that question
But to get there, we’re gonna start by talking about what God wants to offer gay people
Then we’ll cover the last chapter of Spiritual Friendship to highlight perhaps the greatest need of gay Christians
and finally, we’ll answer this question: what is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?


my story

[Notes]
But before any of that, I want to share with you about my story
 
Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that, and I felt very alone
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay
 
Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
 
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year I shared with you guys
after a gay brother was kicked out of our Christian fraternity, I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.
I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone.
After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.
These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
 
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
Those realizations were the beginnings of EQUIP, the ministry I started 7 years ago, and NFOB, the monastery I started 3 years ago



What do I believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.

[Notes]
I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction—me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay—is a result of the Fall.
When Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
The introduction of sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first intended us. 
 
I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world he would have expected me to be experience same-sex attraction.
But because I was born into a broken world one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin. It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold my attractions against me.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls.






We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
Sexual orientation change efforts are harmfully ineffective
What do I believe?

[Notes]
I do not believe people choose who they are attracted to: choose to be gay or straight.
The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to.
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation.
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants, but scientific studies show that only 3-4% of people report experiencing any meaningful change in their same-sex attractions.
And studies have shown that SOCEs nearly double the risk of suicide.







God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.
What do I believe?

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness—to give up the prospect of romance, dating, sex, marriage, and children to do kingdom work parents don’t have the time or energy to do--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context
 
For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I grew a desire for them specifically so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I want, I started asking God about 7 years ago what He wants.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And about 5 years ago I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So 5 years ago some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers



Discussion



How are these beliefs similar or different than what you heard growing up?
What you’ve heard in churches recently?
What you personally believe?




WHY?


[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”
I’m not going to get into those. I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are
No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design






Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singlness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel
you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best






But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
My gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
but even if I wasn’t convinced logically of a biblical sexual ethic, I couldn’t ignore the evidence I see in my own life and the lives of others that a progressive sexual ethic isn’t God’s best
I couldn’t ignore the bad fruit of in my life and the lives of others who believe that God blesses same-sex Christian marriages in the same way He blessed opposite-sex Christian marriages

In particular, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God after 5 of so years

At first, they performed theological acrobatics
to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agreed with a majority of queer theologians who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet my gay Christian friends continued to believe
that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible must just be outdated and lack authority or relevance for modern people.
But once my gay Christian friends decided
that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds.
And they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is even real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know
who have held that progressive sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of a historic understanding
of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly,
gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends.
I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

Let me be clear: I want all of my friends to have robust relationships with God. It pains me to see this consistent pattern. But the fruit of a progressive sexual ethic that I see in the lives of my gay friends is them losing their faith.







Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

The Church MUST do better.
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
On the other hand, my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin,
and this affects their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do.
This is because churches have done a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me.
I think that’s the double burden of Christians who are gay: churches don’t know how to love us well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either.
 
Yet even if churches are failing to love and care for people like me, that doesn’t make something that is bad for me now good for me;
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to being edifying to God.
 
Why did God make the world this way? I don’t know. At the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job.
I must trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings.
 
I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a traditional sexual ethic because there’s even worse fruit of a progressive sexual ethic.



SOLUTION


[Notes]
no, I think the solution is for churches to learn how to better embody a biblical sexual ethic in a way that produces good fruit for gay people



Solution for Good



Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
We’ve got to start inviting every Christian to think theologically about their sexual stewardship and to take seriously what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness for straight people, God’s purposes for marriage, and unbiblical divorce and remarriage
 
We’ve got to make sure everyone in our churches know about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, and in particular kids so that they never have to make sense of their sexuality alone in the closet
 
We have to become churches where every Christian considers vocational singleness and could find permanent, lived-in family in lifetime singleness
 
I think if we do these things, our churches can become a places that offer gay people something undeniably better than the empty promises of the world
We can be a place where gay Christians find more beauty and connection from following God’s teachings than from seeking out romantic relationships with people of the same sex



Discussion



If our churches embodied a traditional sexual ethic in these ways, would they be places where gay people could thrive with reasonable effort according to God’s wisdom? Why or why not?



What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

[Notes]
Remember our question for today
We’ve talked about what God wants to offer gay people




FRIENDSHIP


[Notes]
Now let’s cover the last chapter of Spiritual Friendship to highlight perhaps the greatest need of gay Christians



Wes encourages us to…



Recognize our need for friendship
Invest in current friendships
Practice friendship in community
Teach about friendship in our churches
Be hospitable instead of hoarding
Sacrifice time, money, location, other friends, etc. to maintain commitments

[Notes]
So help me out, what are the 6 suggestions Wes offers in chapter 6

Wes encourages us to...
recognize our need for friendship (how do we need friendship. could friendship solve our loneliness?)
invest more deeply in the friendships we already have (everything beautiful gets normal and boring)
practice friendship in community, not in isolation
churches should teach about friendship because it will build community
don’t hoard, be hospitable
choose to sacrifice time, money, location, other friends, etc. to maintain spiritual friendships



Wes encourages us to…



“I was careful to remind myself that it was a gift that had emerged suddenly and it could depart just as quickly as it had appeared…I didn’t want to become too emotionally invested and not leave myself an oasis of self-reliance, in case my friends moved away or didn’t entirely reciprocate my affection.”


[Notes]
Wes spoke about a communal living arrangement with another couple, saying this:
“I was careful to remind myself that it was a gift that had emerged suddenly and it could depart just as quickly as it had appeared…I didn’t want to become too emotionally invested and not leave myself an oasis of self-reliance, in case my friends moved away or didn’t entirely reciprocate my affection.”



Wes encourages us to…



“As he described what I’ve heard a thousand times before from other people in our shoes—that what he feared above all was getting close to people only to have to say good-bye over and over again and remain stuck in a groove of loneliness—I felt an involuntary spasm of compassion for him.”

[Notes]
Later he described a conversation with a friend:
“As he described what I’ve heard a thousand times before from other people in our shoes—that what he feared above all was getting close to people only to have to say good-bye over and over again and remain stuck in a groove of loneliness—I felt an involuntary spasm of compassion for him.



Wes encourages us to…



“And I know that, modern life being what it is and with none of us being quite ready to take a vow of stability, we’ll likely find ourselves saying a more permanent good-bye at some point in the future, perhaps even as soon as next year."

[Notes]
At the end of the book, he celebrates the couple’s choice to stay in Pittsburg, but he is cautionary:
“And I know that, modern life being what it is and with none of us being quite ready to take a vow of stability, we’ll likely find ourselves saying a more permanent good-bye at some point in the future, perhaps even as soon as next year.”

this is the most painful part of being a gay Christian called to vocational singleness
I have no built-in companions
without commitment from others, it is dangerous to let myself learn to need people as family, only for them to abandon me
and as Wes notes, other married people don’t seem willing to take a vow of stability—to commit to being family for others, no matter what

because gay Christians are the only people considering lifetime singleness
there’s too few of us for the Church to take notice
the Church doesn’t teach about lifetime singleness
the Church doesn’t celebrate our milestones
and the Church doesn’t help me find permanent family



What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

Give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness.

[Notes]
which brings us to our first question:
What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness

the Church will not be a place where LGBT+ Christians can thrive in celibacy until 10% of straight Christians accept their call to vocational singleness

so if you really love gay people, you see their pain, and you wish someone did something about it
offer the question of marriage or celibacy to God
instead of assuming God has marriage for you and plowing head with plans to take marriage
stop
and open-handedly offer that question to God






Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen


Everyone should discern

[Notes]
but that’s not the only reasons you should be asking God this question
Scripture actually teaches that regardless of our sympathies for gay people, we should all be offering this question to God
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

Now, you might point out that in verse 12 Jesus says that some “choose” the vocation of singleness.
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?
Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.
Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.

Or you might point out 1 Cor 7:9 that says ”it is better to marry than to burn”
A common interpretation of 1 Corinthians 7:9 is that poor sexual stewardship in singleness shows that one has not been given the gift of singleness and should instead marry.
Now, it’s more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.

At this point, it’d also be helpful to make a distinction between temporary singleness and the vocational singleness I’m talking about here
we are all born into temporary singleness
that’s our default state
and then some of us are called to Christian marriage
and others of us are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
 
why is it important to make that distinction?
because there’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage versus accepting a call to permanently give up the prospect of romance, sex, marriage, or children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work parents can’t
My friends in temporary singleness seem to be only shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and the kingdom work they’re doing, because they need to always be prepared to reorganize their lives around a future marriage
and the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
they’re commending vocational singleness
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness







A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness. 
But…

[Notes]
now a single person might push back
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally natural
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should all discern which God has called us to










Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.
Why discern?

[Notes]
is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no
but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, Max Thurian, and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift, if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly
how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?
DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness. And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference







Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
How to discern

[Notes]
so what does it look like to ask God this question
to give God a chance
to discern?

Here’s 5 suggestions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.






Discussion



What next steps do you want to take to begin discerning whether God has called you to a vocation of marriage or vocational singleness?




QUESTIONS?







Connect with Pieter at
me@pieterLvalk.com

Learn more at
pieterLvalk.com
Connect & Learn
