

of
Pieter Valk

[Notes]
Hello, I am Pieter Valk

I studied at Vanderbilt University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Lipscomb University
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and one day a week I serve as a licensed professional counselor for people trying to make sense of faith and sexuality

And the rest of the week, I’m the Executive Director of EQUIP
A team of missionary consultants committed to equipping the Church with the understanding and skills to better love and serve those who experience same-sex attraction
Or to put it another way
We partner with churches to help them become places where gay people can thrive according to an orthodox Christian sexual ethic


What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

[Notes]
Beyond the obvious
Love, compassion, empathy, care, kindness, etc.

What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

Today I want to answer that question
But to get there, we’re gonna start by talking about what God wants to offer gay people
Then we’ll cover the last chapter of Spiritual Friendship to highlight perhaps the greatest need of gay Christians
and finally, we’ll answer this question: what is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?



MY STORY


[Notes]
But before any of that, I want to share with you about my story

I studied at Vanderbilt University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Lipscomb University
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling, I am a Licensed Professional Counselor, and one day a week I meet with people navigating questions of faith, sexuality, and identity
And the rest of the week, I’m run EQUIP, a team of missionary consultants committed to helping churches become places where LGBT+ people can belong and thrive according to orthodox Christian sexual ethics
What do I mean by ”orthodox Christian sexual ethics”? A belief that God calls all Christians to a Christian vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom or a Christian vocation of marriage with someone of the opposite sex

Why does this matter to me?
Well I’m a Christian
I’m gay
And I’m convinced that God calls all Christians to a Christian vocational singleness or a Christian vocation of marriage with someone of the opposite sex
And my journey trying to make sense of all of that has been painful

I grew up hearing that being gay was bad, dirty, and disgusting.
When a gay person came on TV or was seen in public, people commented how gross gay marriage was and how godless gay people were.
If the topic ever came up in church, it was a simple statement that God was against homosexuality.
So when in 6th grade, I realized that I was gay, it's no surprise that I thought I was bad, dirty, and disgusting. I believed I must have done something wrong to deserve this.

So I tried to make a deal with God.
I promised Him that I would read my Bible every day for six months if He would make me straight.
I held up my end of the bargain, but God didn’t.
I promised I would obey my parents without fail. No change.
I stopped playing video games. Still gay.
Time and time again I begged God to heal me if being gay wasn’t how I was supposed to be, and time and time again change didn't seem to be His will.

On top of this shame, I felt very alone.
I didn’t belong to gay people
And I didn’t seem to belong to straight Christians
I must be the only one

And I was afraid of anyone finding out. I was afraid they would reject me
In middle school I played leading roles in both of our theater productions, but in high school I quickly realized that the same people in the theater club where also in our Gay-Straight Alliance. I could not risk anyone suspecting that I was gay. No more theater for Pieter.

Gay marriage was a particularly contentious topic during the 2008 election, so naturally, our government class played out the same divisive conversations found on CNN. Unintentionally fulfilling stereotypes, I was one of the most ardent opponents of gay marriage—thinking that perhaps that would throw people off my trail. I remember a female classmate turning around in her chair to berate me for being a bigot. Then she said with omniscience, “I bet you’re secretly gay and one day you’re going to come out. You’re just so homophobic because you don’t want anyone to know who you are.” I was terrified.

I am most ashamed of these moments where my fear of being outed and disgust of my homosexuality turned to homophobia that hurt others. I’m haunted by a scene from high school cross country. Derek was the only openly gay guy in our school and he was on the team. As we waited at the starting line for a race to begin, everyone paired up for partner stretching. But one by one as Derek asked the other guys to help him stretch, he was turned away with “No. Gross! I don’t want to touch you and I don’t want you touching me!” Then he got to me and I (sheepishly) refused. I dished out the same pain I had spent tears and prayers to soothe.
 
When I started to share my story with others, it was a mixed bag
One night during sophomore year of high school, I lay on my bed listening to Come to Jesus by Chris Rice on repeat. I didn’t know if I could trust anyone, but I couldn’t handle being alone and ashamed anymore. I finally mustered the courage, walked downstairs, and told my parents. They didn’t know how to help me any more than I did, but it was still a great relief: I wasn't all alone with my secret anymore.

Toward the end of high school I shared my story with my youth pastor. One night during a youth conference weekend, our youth pastor gave a devotion about shame and encouraged each of us to talk to an adult leader about our deepest secret. But when I shared my deepest secret, he was silent. After a string of meaningless Christian cliches, he sent me away.

Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry. I followed every instruction of my mentor, led bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts. I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired. And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus ministry or at any university. The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year of college after a gay brother was kicked out of our Christian fraternity, I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity. I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed gay brothers to know that they weren’t alone. My fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better. These men embodied Christ for me better than a church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
All of us were afraid that following the Bible’s teachings meant that we would be alone
And I realized that none of us had parents or churches who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

That motivated me to do something to change that
A couple years later, I started EQUIP with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve people like me
So that’s my story
We’ll talk more about EQUIP and how we help churches later


 
 




MY BELIEFS


[Notes]
First, I want to be clear about what I believe and about what I don’t believe



My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin. (Matthew 6:12-13; James 1:14-15; Hebrews 4:15) 

Same-sex romantic/sexual activity is a sin. (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

God does not promise that a person’s same-sex attraction will change in this lifetime.

We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.

[Notes]
It is a result of the fall, a brokenness

4. I was neither born gay nor did I choose to be gay



My Beliefs



Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all. (John 10:28-30; Romans 8:38-39; Ephesians 4:30) 

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully. (Ezekiel 36:26) 

[Notes]
5. Same-sex sexual sin isn’t a salvation issue any more than running a redlight is



My Beliefs



God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like. (Hebrews 13; Acts 2: 42-47) 

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ. (1 Corinthians 12:12-31) 



MY CALLING


[Notes]
In light of that, how do I steward my sexuality?
While I’m not bisexual—I don’t generally find women to be attractive—I dated a couple of women in college and developed specific attractions for them. So I knew that if God wanted me to marry, I could. But 4 years ago I started asking God, “What do you have for me? Do you want me to get married? Do you want me to commit to lifetime singleness? Do you want me to leave both doors open?" Today, I’m 100% sure that the calling, gift, vocation that I have been given is singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

I’m really thankful for how vocational singleness makes me available for ministry—I could do the work of EQUIP and the counseling I do if I were married with kids
But its been difficult—particularly the loneliness of not having a family of companions committed to me—we’ll talk more about this later

No one can live life alone, so three years ago some friends and I started building a Christian brotherhood where men called to singleness for the Lord can live together permanently, called the Nashville Family of Brothers. We’re still a part of our local churches. We’ve got normal jobs. We’re still connected to parents and their kids. But we pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together.




WHY?


[Notes]
But More important than what I believe
why do I believe these things? Particularly if I have found walking this out to be lonely?



Why I believe this



What does the Bible teach about Christian marriage and celibacy?
What does the Bible teach about same-sex sexual and romantic activity?

[Notes]
That’s a big question. To answer that question, we’ve got to break that down into two related questions:
What does the Bible teach about Christian marriage and vocational singleness/celibacy?
What does the Bible teach about same-sex sexual and romantic activity?

Let’s start with that first one



Intimacy & Family



God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.

God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.

[Notes]
God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family. How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.
 
God put Himself in families. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a family called the Trinity. And the Trinity created this world, made man, gave us choice, and sent His son to live a perfect life and die on the cross for our sins so that we could be a part of His family. The Bible goes even further to establish that God is in family and He invites us into that family by calling us, the group of people who follow Jesus, Christ’s bride and calling Jesus our groom. We’re being married into the family of God.

(SKIP) In John 3:29, John the Baptist meets Jesus for the first time and describes himself as a guest at a wedding where Jesus is the groom and the people of God are his bride. In Ephesians 5 Paul uses an analogy of a husband and wife to teach Christ-followers to submit to God and to celebrate that we are Christ’s bride. Finally, in Revelation 19:6-9, the Apostle John describes a wedding feast at the end of time when Christ returns triumphantly to celebrate being united with his bride, the Church—that’s us!



Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
But God isn’t just a being in a family. The love enjoyed in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church is a particular kind of love. Historically, Christians have characterized that love in six ways: God’s love is complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable:

First, God’s love is complementary. There is a different-ness between the persons of the Trinity—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. And there is complementarity between Christ and his bride, the Church.

(SKIP) In Revelations 7:9, the Apostle John describes a celebration of the diversity of God’s people: “After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne…”
 
Second, God’s love is intimate. The persons of the Trinity know each other perfectly and are fully known by each other.

(SKIP) In John 17:20, Jesus speaks longingly about the Trinity when praying for his disciples: “‘My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they...be one as we are one—I in them and you in me—so that they may be brought to complete unity. Then the world will know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.’” God the Father reciprocates this affection. Just after Jesus is baptized, the following happens in Matthew 3:16-17” “...At that moment heaven was opened, and [Jesus] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.’”
 
Plus, Christ intimately knows and loves His people and wants them to seek out relationship with Him.

(SKIP)  1 John 4: 7, 8, and 19 say, “Dear friends, let us love one another, for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love. We love because he first loved us.” We can only love because God Himself is love, made us to be creatures who love, and loved us first.
 
Third, God’s love is procreative, life-giving. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit made the world, filled it with animals, and made us humans, together. The Trinity gave us life. And then God became man and Jesus lived and died for us so that we could have life.

In John 10:10 Jesus says, “I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full.” Without Jesus we are dead people walking. We have sinned against God, and we do not deserve to join Him in heaven. But Jesus paid the price for our sins so that we could have eternal life.
 
Fourth, the love of God is faithful. There is a perfect and permanent faithfulness in the Trinity and from Christ to His people. No matter what we do, God will never abandon us or withhold his love.

(SKIP) Lamentations 3:22-23 says it this way: “The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases; His mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is [God’s] faithfulness.”
 
Fifth, the love of God is sacrificial. As we’ve already mentioned, Jesus offered himself up as a perfect sacrifice so that all of God’s children could return to Him. 

(SKIP) Paul describes Christ’s sacrifice in this way in Romans 5:6 and 8: “You see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly... But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.”
 
And finally, the love of God is hospitable. Ultimately, the work of creating this world and humans to fill it was an invitation into God’s family. And then God extended His arms of invitation again by dying on the cross so we could be reunited with Him.




Intimacy & Family



We are created in God’s image for that kind of love with God and each other

Sexuality – our need for relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive that kind of love

[Notes]
Because we are created in God’s image, we are made for that kind of love with God and each other
we are all made for diverse, intimate, spiritually procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality

our sexuality is our need for those things
our need to be in relationship
to know and be known
to give and receive love
and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on cognitive, physical, and spiritual levels



Intimacy & Family



We are all created for family in the Body of Christ (Genesis 2, Leviticus 26:12) 

Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

[Notes]
Plus, we are all created to enjoy this within the context of family. But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids. In Matthew 12:46-50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family, rejecting familial ties based solely on biology and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ:
 
“While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him. Someone told him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.’ But to the one who had told him this, Jesus replied, ‘Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?’ And pointing to his disciples, he said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers! For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’”
 
Jesus defines Christian family as a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other. From the beginning, families made up of God’s children were intended to imitate the love within the Trinity and between God and His people: to bear the image of that love. The love found in families was intended to be intimate, faithful, sacrificial, diverse, live-giving, and hospitable, embodying God’s love in beautiful ways.



Intimacy & Family



Neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime.

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.


[Notes]
3 caveats:

neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meeting our intimacy needs

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime. Isaiah 59:2 says that our sins, our imperfection, our unwise choices have separated us from God and each other. Because this world is broken and we are broken, we can only ever connect with God and each other imperfectly. There’s this distance because of brokenness that we can never cross. Some amount of loneliness is a part of life. It is unavoidable.
 
So should we just give up and stop trying to connect in healthy ways? No! For starters, even if we can’t meet all of our needs fully and finally, we can still get a lot of what we need. We can still enjoy rich, satisfying intimacy with God and other people in this life. And second, if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.




Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
So how does Christian marriage embody these elements of God’s
And in that way serve as a physical sign of God’s love?



Theology of Marriage



Lifetime vocation between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy, raise children for the Body of Christ, and embody the gospel for each other and the world

[Notes]
Well, Christian marriage—a marriage joined and sustained by God
it is a lifetime commitment between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy with each other and raise children
to embody the gospel for each other and the world by reflecting the Trinity and God relationship with the Church






How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually
Theology of Marriage

[Notes]
How does Christian marriage specifically embody the gospel and reflect the Trinity and God’s relationship with the Church?

complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically
intimate - sexually, emotionally, and spiritually






How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences
Hospitable – opening one’s home up to those outside of the nuclear family
Theology of Marriage

[Notes]
procreative - raise children (note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)
faithful - lifetime
sacrificial - in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer
hospitable - invite others into home

Have yall read Theology of the Body of Beginners yet?
So this is probably familiar






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

Theology of Celibacy

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
Theology of Celibacy

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
in Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus says that God has called us to either marriage or vocational singleness and given us a capacity to accept Jesus’ teachings about marriage and vocational singleness, according to our calling
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul says that God gives some the gift of vocational singleness and others the gift of marriage
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
At this point, I think it’d be helpful to make a distinction between temporary singleness and the vocational singleness I’m talking about here
we are all born into temporary singleness
that’s our default state
and then some of us are called to Christian marriage
and others of us are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
 
why is it important to make that distinction?
because there’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage versus accepting a call to permanently give up the prospect of romance, sex, marriage, or children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work parents can’t
My friends in temporary singleness seem to be only shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and the kingdom work they’re doing, because they need to always be prepared to reorganize their lives around a future marriage
and the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
they’re commending vocational singleness
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness
so I want to particularly focus on vocational singleness, because that’s the one we don’t hear much about in church
Plus, even if you’re only single temporarily, I think there are ways you can borrow from vocational singleness, even if only for a time






“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Theology of Celibacy

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth 
Theology of Celibacy

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE
Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.
But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian celibacy can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.
Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

Theology of Celibacy

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy



What’s God offering?
God does not bless same-sex marriages because they fall outside of God’s design for marriage
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses
Same-sex sexual/romantic activity is sinful
God offers LGBT+ Christians the same options as everyone else: Christian celibacy or marriage 





[Notes]
Now, before even getting into what the Bible has to say directly about same-sex sexual and romantic activity
We can already answer the question about what God wants to offer gay people
Based on God’s design for the vocations that he blesses

Same-sex marriage do not fulfill God’s design for Christian marriage
Anymore than two opposite-sex non-Christians do
Or two opposite-sex Christians who don’t treat the marriage as lifelong or for the purposes of raising children

There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses

So, same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins

God offers LGBT+ Christians the same options as everyone else: Christian celibacy or marriage 

And then, there’s even more evidence for a traditional sexual ethic when we get to the 6 verses that talk directly about same-sex sexual activity



Discussion



If all we had were God’s teachings about Christian marriage and Christian celibacy, could we conclude God’s teachings about same-sex sexual and romantic activity? If not, what lingers?
39

[Notes]
Our argument here isn’t about punishing gay people
It’s about God having a unique and limited design for Christian marriage
There’s lot of marriages that don’t fulfill that design and therefore aren’t joined or sustained by God
This is a question of: What is God’s best?
The big problem: we don’t police straight Christians who misuse marriage
The church isn’t a place where gay people can actually thrive in celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage



Genesis 19



Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by God for their oppression, adultery, lying, abetting criminals, arrogance, complacency, indifference to the poor, gang rape, homosexual conduct, inhospitality, etc.

In the specific event that led to the cities’ destruction, all of the men of Sodom came to Lot’s house and demanded he hand over the angels in his house who had taken male form so that the men could have sex with them

[Notes]
Some claim that the only sins the people of Sodom were committing were inhospitality and sexual excess

But traditionally, these verses have been interpreted to communicate that same-sex sexual activity, in addition to all of the other sins the people of Sodom were committing, was sinful





Leviticus 18 and 20



“You shall not lie with a male as with a woman; it is an abomination.” (Lev 18: 22)

“If a man lies with a male as with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.” (Lev 20:13)


[Notes]
Some claim these prohibitions are in the context of prostitution or against men playing the passive role in sex, therefore they can only be interpreted to forbid those specific things

But traditionally, these verses have been interpreted to communicate that same-sex sexual activity are sins




Romans 1:18-32



“Even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones. In the same way men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another.” (Romans 1:26-27)

[Notes]
Some focus on this being sexual excess or having sex contrary to one’s orientation

But traditionally, these verses have been interpreted to communicate that same-sex attraction is fallen and same-sex sexual activity is sinful




1 Corinthians 6:9-10



“Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.”

[Notes]
The key words are…
“the sexually immoral” = malakoi = effeminate man, passive partner in same-sex sex, male prostitutes
“men who practice homosexuality” = arsenokoitai = general term for same-sex sex

Some claim that Paul is merely condemning effeminate men and sexual excess

But traditionally, these verses have been interpreted to communicate that both the active and passive partner in same-sex sexual activity are sinning



1 Timothy 1:8-10



”The law is not laid down for the just but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who strike their fathers and mothers, for murderers, the sexually immoral, men who practice homosexuality, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine.

[Notes]
We’ve got the same words and arguments here

Some claim that Paul is merely condemning effeminate men and sexual excess

But traditionally, these verses have been interpreted to communicate that both the active and passive partner in same-sex sexual activity are sinning



Why I believe this



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

Marriage defined between man and women (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:4-5) 

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage (Genesis 19:1-9)

[Notes]
So when we pool all of this together
The Bible’s teachings about Christian marriage and celibacy
The Bible’s teachings about same-sex sexual and romantic activity
What do we have?

Well, every time the Bible talks about same-sex sexual activity, it calls it a sin
It calls it a sin when it’s just the passive partner
It calls it a sin when it’s the active partner
It calls same-sex attraction a brokenness, a sign of the fall

And every time the Bible talks about marriage, it defines it as between a man and a women
Even Jesus!

But still, each of these examples of same-sex sexual activity are within the context of…

So is the Bible crystal clear?
No
But if we ask: which conclusion does the evidence point to?
The evidence overwhelming points to what the majority of Christians throughout time and the majority of Christians today still believe about sexual ethics



Honestly, I wish…



But, I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic
Less commitment and more infidelity
My gay Christians friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic lost their faith
My own story of pain

[Notes]
Honestly, I wish I could somehow convince myself theologically that God would bless a same-sex marriage between two Christians
But even if I could get myself there, I’ve seen bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my life and the lives of others
At a 30,000 foot level, the average adult same-sex partnership lasts much shorter than the average opposite-sex partnership
And the rates of adultery and infidelity are much higher in same-sex marriages
Now we can argue whether this is the result of societal oppression, the bad fruit of not following God’s design, or both

Then, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobats to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said
so they get to a place where they don’t believe the Bible is authoritative or binding for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?
and listen, I don’t want that for my gay friends
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith

but I think the bad fruit of my own experiences has been most convincing
Satan told me for years that if I just had a relationship with a man, everything would be better
I’d finally have everything I needed
And I wish I could have just trusted God that Satan’s lies were lies
but I couldn’t
I had to test them for myself
And my own experience was that romantic relationships with men were not everything I hoped they would be
they were painful
they were not good
and while I haven’t experienced everything under the Sun, so I can’t say authoritatively that I know from experience that nothing would satisfy me
one experience was just about the clearest contrast between sin and beauty that I could ask for
when I was in a particularly dark place in college, I connected romantically with another guy
and despite the fact that I was doing things that the movies told me would make me feel more connected and loved and known than anything else, I felt so alone
and then after we stopped, the reality of what we had just done rushed in
and we sat there, on the floor, leaning against the wall, shoulder to shoulder
and we started crying, both of us
mixed in with the crying we both verbalized what we were feeling
we shared how empty that felt for both of us
how lonely we felt
how messed up this world was and disconnected we felt from God
how confused we were that God would let us be this way and yet connections like we had didn’t feel right
and you know what, I didn’t feel alone anymore
I didn’t feel disconnected anymore
you see, the romantic connections that Satan promised would satisfy me failed
and then in stark contrast to that, the two of us confessing to each other and crying out to God satisfied us and felt more beautifully intimate than anything we shared before

So no, even if I could convince myself logically of a progressive sexual ethic, I couldn’t get past all of the bad fruit I have seen



Bad fruit everywhere



Gay Christians following Biblical teaching experience bad fruit too.

The Church MUST do better.

[Notes]
But there’s bad fruit of a traditional sexual ethic
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians: the Church doesn’t know how to love us well, and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either
And that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

But, how could the Church do this better?




Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in celibacy or Christian marriage





[Notes]
We’ve got to become churches where…

Churches where everyone is thinking theologically about their sexual stewardship so that LGBT+ Christians find fellow cross-bearers in their straight brothers and sisters
Churches where we talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality so that everyone in our church knows how to reflect Christ to LGBT+ people and so that LGBT+ people know it’s safe to come out
Churches where every kid grows up hearing that if they are gay, God loves them, God has good plans for them, and they can share their story with their parents and pastors
Churches where pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people well
Churches where LGBT+ people could actually thrive in celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage

We can’t just tell LGBT+ people what they should say NO to
We have to offer something beautiful that they can eagerly shout YES to

And this is what EQUIP does
We help churches realize this vision
We come alongside pastors and other church leaders to help them transform their churches into places where LGBT+ people could thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic



Discussion



If your church did what it took to realize this vision, would you feel like what God is offering LGBT+ people is actually good and beautiful?
1:06


What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

[Notes]
Remember our question for today
We’ve talked about what God wants to offer gay people




FRIENDSHIP


[Notes]
Now let’s cover the last chapter of Spiritual Friendship to highlight perhaps the greatest need of gay Christians



Wes encourages us to…



Recognize our need for friendship
Invest in current friendships
Practice friendship in community
Teach about friendship in our churches
Be hospitable instead of hoarding
Sacrifice time, money, location, other friends, etc. to maintain commitments

[Notes]
So help me out, what are the 6 suggestions Wes offers in chapter 6

Wes encourages us to...
recognize our need for friendship (how do we need friendship. could friendship solve our loneliness?)
invest more deeply in the friendships we already have (everything beautiful gets normal and boring)
practice friendship in community, not in isolation
churches should teach about friendship because it will build community
don’t hoard, be hospitable
choose to sacrifice time, money, location, other friends, etc. to maintain spiritual friendships



Wes encourages us to…



“I was careful to remind myself that it was a gift that had emerged suddenly and it could depart just as quickly as it had appeared…I didn’t want to become too emotionally invested and not leave myself an oasis of self-reliance, in case my friends moved away or didn’t entirely reciprocate my affection.”


[Notes]
Wes spoke about a communal living arrangement with another couple, saying this:
“I was careful to remind myself that it was a gift that had emerged suddenly and it could depart just as quickly as it had appeared…I didn’t want to become too emotionally invested and not leave myself an oasis of self-reliance, in case my friends moved away or didn’t entirely reciprocate my affection.”



Wes encourages us to…



“As he described what I’ve heard a thousand times before from other people in our shoes—that what he feared above all was getting close to people only to have to say good-bye over and over again and remain stuck in a groove of loneliness—I felt an involuntary spasm of compassion for him.”

[Notes]
Later he described a conversation with a friend:
“As he described what I’ve heard a thousand times before from other people in our shoes—that what he feared above all was getting close to people only to have to say good-bye over and over again and remain stuck in a groove of loneliness—I felt an involuntary spasm of compassion for him.



Wes encourages us to…



“And I know that, modern life being what it is and with none of us being quite ready to take a vow of stability, we’ll likely find ourselves saying a more permanent good-bye at some point in the future, perhaps even as soon as next year."

[Notes]
At the end of the book, he celebrates the couple’s choice to stay in Pittsburg, but he is cautionary:
“And I know that, modern life being what it is and with none of us being quite ready to take a vow of stability, we’ll likely find ourselves saying a more permanent good-bye at some point in the future, perhaps even as soon as next year.”

this is the most painful part of being a gay Christian called to a vocation of celibacy
I have no built-in companions
without commitment from others, it is dangerous to let myself learn to need people as family, only for them to abandon me
and as Wes notes, other married people don’t seem willing to take a vow of stability—to commit to being family for others, no matter what

because gay Christians are the only people considering lifetime singleness
there’s too few of us for the Church to take notice
the Church doesn’t teach about lifetime singleness
the Church doesn’t celebrate our milestones
and the Church doesn’t help me find permanent family



What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

Give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness.

[Notes]
which brings us to our first question:
What is the most impactful thing straight Christians can do for gay people?

give God a chance to call you to vocational singleness

the Church will not be a place where LGBT+ Christians can thrive in celibacy until 10% of straight Christians accept their call to a vocation of celibacy

so if you really love gay people, you see their pain, and you wish someone did something about it
offer the question of marriage or celibacy to God
instead of assuming God has marriage for you and plowing head with plans to take marriage
stop
and open-handedly offer that question to God



Everyone should discern



Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or celibacy—is called and given, not chosen



[Notes]
but that’s not the only reasons you should be asking God this question
Scripture actually teaches that regardless of our sympathies for gay people, we should all be offering this question to God
as we’ve already explored, Scripture makes clear that our relational vocation—marriage or celibacy—is called and given, not chosen
Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of celibacy has been given will accept his teachings about celibacy.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or celibacy, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to celibacy—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to celibacy. God has called others to marriage.



But…



A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficult being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and celibacy. 

[Notes]
now you might balk
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to celibacy are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And marriage and celibacy are actually equally natural
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in celibacy? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both celibacy and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should all discern which God has called us to





How to Discern



Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of what you might be called to
Consider your pastor and current circumstances
Seek support from your church

[Notes]
so what does it look like to ask God this question
to give God a chance
to discern?

Here’s 5 suggestions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or celibacy, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both celibacy and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward celibacy or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to celibacy

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to a vocation of celibacy?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to lifetime singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.






Discussion



What next steps to you want to take to begin discerning whether God has called you to a vocation of marriage or a vocation of celibacy?

1:40
