

FINDING
Committed Community
IN SINGLENESS

[Notes]
God made all of us for healthy intimacy in the context of committed human family,
including those in long-term singleness.
Today I want to discuss what kind of intimacy we’re made for
and explore practical steps singles can take to cultivate intentional community
that meets their needs and strengthens their faith.


Pieter Valk of
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
But first, why should you care what I have to say
well my name is Pieter Valk

I’m a writer and speaker about vocational singleness and LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
I’ve been published in places like Christianity Today
and taught at over 65 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries 

I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip—a premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
We’ve trained over 11,000 Christian leaders 

I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality 

I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenically Christian monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness 

And I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians seeking to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic 

I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary,
and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University 

each of my jobs has to do with sexuality
and finding belonging in the body of Christ
this work matters to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay 
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic

What do I mean when I say “a traditional sexual ethic”?
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom 

Full disclaimer, I'm an Anglican.
I really value ecumenical dialogue, and I'm so grateful to be a guest in your space.
We may disagree about whether Jesus is God, whether Jesus was celibate,
or whether everyone will be celibate in Heaven,
but today we're going to focus on where we have so much agreement:
loving gay people as they discover the most faithful ways to honor God with their sexualities.

Final note: if you’d like a copy of my full notes after this,
go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
to give me an email address to send them to


WE FEEL IT


[Notes]
How do we know God made us for healthy intimacy in the context of committed human family?
I think at a basic, intuitive leave, we feel we need it







Left out of covid bubbles
Alone in mundane times,          painful times, and joyful times
Who will be at dinner next Tuesday? At Christmas a decade from now? At my deathbed?
We feel the need

[Notes]
we feel that we need family
You felt that when you were left out of covid bubbles
And hurt when everyone else posted about how grateful they were to have at least their spouse and kids to endure lockdown with
Or posted about that one other nuclear family they created a covid bubble with,
All while you doom-scrolled through their meals and movie nights you weren’t invited to

You feel that when you do mundane times alone - breakfast before work, laundry, making dinner, watching your favorite show
You feel that when you do painful times alone - getting fired, losing a loved one, not getting your bid on a house, learning about an illness, seeing tragedy on the news that hits close to home
You feel that when you celebrate alone - decade birthdays, promotions, new jobs, paying off student loans, graduations, well-cooked dinner, new pet
You feel that when you tire of the revolving door of roommates and small groups and temporary mentors

You feel that when you wonder who will be at dinner next week
who will you spend holidays with year after year
who will be there when you die

After college I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
But each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.
And every time I connected deeply with people in healthy ways—only for that connection to be torn—I was injured.
Eventually my heart started yelling and screaming in resistance, "Not again! This is too painful!”
My heart made clear that I couldn't connect deeply again unless it was safe.
I knew what safe meant: real, permanent family 



MADE FOR IT


[Notes]
We don’t just feel we need it.
We see in Scripture that we're all made for intimacy in permanent family











We’re all made for intimacy                           in permanent family.

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.
Made for family

[Notes]
How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family,
and He created us in His image for those same things.







Made for intimacy…
The love in God’s family is intimate
We’re created in God’s image for intimacy
Our sexuality is our need for intimacy
We’re made mind, body, and spirit
Made for family

[Notes]
He created us for intimacyThe love in God's family is intimate.
The persons of the Trinity know each other perfectly and are fully known by each other. 
In John 17:20, Jesus speaks longingly about the Trinity when praying for his disciples:

‘My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they...be one as we are one—I in them and you in me—so that they may be brought to complete unity. Then the world will know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.’ 
 
God the Father reciprocates this affection. Just after Jesus is baptized, the following happens in Matthew 3:16-17“...At that moment heaven was opened, and [Jesus] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.’” 
 
THEN… because we're created in God’s image, we’re made for those same things,
and our sexuality is our need for intimacy, our need to be in relationship,
to know and be known, to give and receive love,
and because we are mind, body, and spirit,
we need connection on an emotional level, intellectual level, physical level, and spiritual level. 









Made for intimacy…
Neither sex nor romance promised or necessary
Everyone needs non-romantic, non-sexual intimacy beyond God and one’s spouse
Made for family

[Notes]
At the same time, neither sex nor romance are promised in Scripture
or necessary to meet our intimacy needs or be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex.
Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the mothers and fathers of the Church have been celibate. 
And Jesus says that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex. 
In Matthew 22:30, He says this:

“At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.” It doesn’t make too much sense that the example of our faith was celibate or that we will all be celibate in heaven if marriage and sex are necessary to be fully human. 

Note: this may not be what some of you believe.
This is just where I’ve coming from as an Anglican.
But regardless, I think we can agree that we don’t have to have romance or sex in this lifetime to be whole people
 
And, yes, if you're married, you'll meet some of your intimacy needs in your relationship with your spouse.But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t meet all of your intimacy needs. 
You will still need emotional intimacy, intellectual intimacy, physical intimacy, and spiritual intimacy from friendship.
We’re all made for it 







Made for intimacy in permanent family
God put Himself in families
God’s family is permanent
We too are made in His image                 for permanent family
Made for family

[Notes]
We're not just made for intimacyWe're made for intimacy IN PERMANENT FAMILY 
 
God put Himself in families. God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Spirit make up a family called the Trinity.
And the Trinity created this world, made man, gave us choice,
and sent His son to live a perfect life and die on the cross for our sins so that we could be a part of His family.
The Bible goes even further to establish that God is in family
and He invites us into that family by calling us, the group of people who follow Jesus,
Christ’s bride and calling Jesus our groom. 
We’re being married into the family of God. 
 
Plus the love in that family is permanent.
There is a perfect and permanent faithfulness in the Trinity and from Christ to His people.No matter what we do, God will never abandon us or withhold his love. 
Lamentations 3:22-23 says it this way:

“The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases; His mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is [God’s] faithfulness.” 
 
THEN, because we are created in God’s image, we’re made for the same thing
we too are made for intimacy in permanent family 
 
But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids.
In Matthew 12:46- 50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family,rejecting familial ties based solely on biology
and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ: 
 
“While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him. Someone told him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.’ But to the one who had told him this, Jesus replied, ‘Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?’ And pointing to his disciples, he said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers! For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’” 







Jesus family:
a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other
Made for family

[Notes]
Jesus defines Christian family as a small community of Christians who live life together
and embody the gospel for each other. 
 
but Jesus still means a robust idea of familyHe still means people you live with in the same house,
share meals with daily,
sit next to and pray with,
celebrate holidays with,
leisure with on your days off,
and do boring daily mundane life with 
 
So We feel we need familyAnd We’re all made for intimacy IN PERMANENT FAMILY
Even singles???


EVEN SINGLES


[Notes]
Yes, even those called to vocational singleness!!!







Still a call to permanent family
Jesus compared celibates to eunuchs who lived in the king's home (Matt 19)
Jesus promises celibates 100-fold spiritual family in this life (Luke 18:28-30)
Paul recognizes celibates need committed companionship (1 Cor 7:36-38)
Paul urges family of widows to keep commitments to community (1 Tim 5)
Even singles

[Notes]
The Church has most consistently understood
the Scriptures to teach
that while vocational singleness is a call
to permanently give up romance, dating, marriage, sex, and children
to do kingdom work parents struggle to find the time, energy, and focus to do, 
it's still a call to intimacy in family. 
 
In Matthew 19:11-12, Jesus compares the celibate to Old Testament eunuchs
who lived in the king's family home while serving his kingdomThey often out-lived the patriarchthey were a part of the family 
When Jesus makes this comparison, part of what he’s doing is promising us that we’ll find family in God’s family,
the king we serve 
 
2. In Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises 100-fold spiritual brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to thosewho permanently give up spouse and children for the sake of kingdom work.he promises FAMILY 
100-fold family to those committed to vocational singleness 
 
3. 1 Corinthians 7:36-38, Paul recognizes that those called to vocational singleness
still need human companionshipby blessing an early Church form of family for celibates. 

4. 1 Tim 5:5-15, Paul recognizes a proto-convent house that provided family to widowsand urges them to faithfully keep their commitments to celibacy and the community. 







Still a call to permanent family
Every time Jesus&Paul speak of celibacy, they recognize they still need human intimacy in permanent, lived-in family
For most, God chooses not to magically meet our human intimacy needs and instead invites us to build family with other believers
Even singles

[Notes]
Every time Jesus and Paul speak of vocational singleness,they seem to recognize in some way that celibates still need human intimacy in permanent, lived-in family. 
 
Perhaps some called to vocational singleness have an even more exceptional filling of the Holy Spirit
such that they don't need as much human intimacy. 
 
But for most celibates I know (including myself),
God does not choose to magically meet our human intimacy needs.Instead, he invites us to build family with other believers. 


DIFFICULT


[Notes]
But it's difficult for those called to vocational singleness to find permanent family, right?







Industrial Revolution and the slow breakdown of community (Rodney Clapp’s Families at the Crossroads)

Today: the idol of Romance
Disney movies + Taylor swift songs     say magical love is the highest good
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
In Rodney Clapp's "Families at the Crossroads"
he argues that the primary reason for the breakdown of a broader experience of community
where celibates could find family
was the industrial revolutionbut not intentionally 
it was accidental
you see, all of a sudden, a bunch more people could afford to move cities and buy single family homesbut they didn't pause to think whether they should, even if they couldSo they put miles and doors between each otherAnd community where vocational singles could find family broke downWe started slipping through the cracks 
 
in recent decades, that’s continued with the idolatry of romanceI'm particular to say the idolatry of romance hereand not the idolatry of marriagebecause healthy theology and practice of Christian marriage is not the problem
and this idol of romance takes its roots LONG before marriage 
Disney channel movies and Taylor Swift songs tells us that magically coupled love is the best thing the world has to offer 







"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue…A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself…every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil...to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.”
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
And Christians don't do much betterDo you recognize this quote from a #1 selling book about Christian masculinity? 
 
"Deep in his heart, every man longs for a battle to fight, an adventure to live, and a beauty to rescue...A woman doesn’t want to be the adventure; she wants to be caught up into something greater than herself...every woman wants to have a beauty to unveil...to simply and truly be the beauty, and be delighted in.” 
 
Do you see the idolatry of romance in that quote? 
 
From an early age, parents and pastors highlight Bible stories and holidays centering romance and marriage.When they say “When you get married...” and ask, “Are you dating anyone?”
they leave no room for stories or celebrations of singleness for the sake of Christ’s kingdom. 
Christian teens assume they are free to indulge in romance as much as they want,
as long as they don’t cross certain lines.72% of pastors surveyed believe “If a person desires to marry and have kids, then God wants them to marry.” 
 
This all leads to painful results 
Half of married Christians get divorcedAnd studies show that singles struggle more with depression, anxiety, doubt in God’s existence, and rebounding from doubt. 







The Idol of Romance promises us easy and perfectly satisfying love, belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness. At what cost?

Casual connection,          codependency, adultery,              divorce, etc.
But it’s difficult

[Notes]
The Idol of Romance promises us easy and perfectly satisfying love,
belonging, family, pleasure, and an escape from loneliness.
At what costs?casual connection, codependency, adultery, divorce 
 
No wonder vocational singles can’t find the family we need 
Plus, we don’t quite know what that would look like if we did find it
We certainly don’t know how to build itAnd we can’t do it alone 







How have you seen this idolatry of romance play out in your community? 
How have single and married people in your community suffered as a result?
Turn&Talk
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
I want us to take a few minutes to consider these questions privately or with a person sitting next to you
And then I’ll open it up for some of you to share with the whole group if you’re willing…

Another reminder, if you’d like my full notes from this presentation
go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
to give me an email address to send them to


DONE BEFORE


[Notes]
But thankfully, we've done this beforeThe Church has a rich history of offering vocational singles
robust family in the body of Christ 







remnuoth - city celibates
Permanent (not waiting for marriage)
Informal single-sex urban clusters + part of local churches (not alone or cloistered)
Participated in economy (not just praying)
Served church + city (not neglecting others)
Common (not exceptional)
We’ve done it before
James E. Goehring, Greg Peters, Vincent Desprez

[Notes]
according to primary sources about celibacy in the first five centuries of the church
Before cave monks and dessert ascetics and cloistered monasteries 
 
there were what’s called the remnuothcity celibatesAnd they walked out this city celibacy in a particular way 
 
First, their celibacy was permanentthe disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples
unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacyInstead of waiting for marriageWe’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus. 
 
Second, they lived in cities in homes with other celibates of the same sex in informal monasteriesand they were still a part of their local churchesInstead of living alone or cloistered from married Christians 
 
Third, they were still a part of the economic life of the city 
Instead of praying all day in closets or caves 
Fourth, they felt called to leverage their availability in singleness to serve others in their church and their cityInstead of running away to serve themselves 
 
And fifth, they were commonthere were tens of thousands of them,
actually 20,000 of them in one city no larger than 100,000
according to recordsThis wasn’t exceptional 
 
THIS is the secret sauce 
 
And we've done just that in NashvilleRemember my story from earlier about those 4 failed attempts at intentional Christian community?
Well in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie, my old pastorI shared that I felt called to vocational singleness,
but I didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need some kind of familyI asked him how I could find the family in the body of Christ I needed?And he responded:
”To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church
or any church in Nashville any time soon.But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family.
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the ChurchThe greatest source of theology in the ChurchAnd the greatest source of social justice in the Church
I think you should start something in NashvilleBuild the family you needAnd stay connected to our church and teach us how to do family betterFind 2-3 other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"



James E. Goehring, Ascetics, Society and the Desert (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 1999)
Chapter 1 of my The Story of Monasticism (Baker Academic, 2015)
Vincent Desprez, "Christian Asceticism between the New Testament and the Beginning of Monasticism," American Benedictine Review 42 (1991): 163-178, 334-344 and 356-373 -- This issue of the ABR is available from the Haithi Trust.








We’ve done it before

[Notes]
fast forward to today...the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness. We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.
And 6 of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family as we discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
(and another 3 or so are considering moving in and committing this fall) 

Here we are at Christmas last year!







Start an intentional Christian community
Move in with an unrelated nuclear family
Live with biological family
We’ve done it before

[Notes]
Now there’s multiple ways vocational singles can find permanent familyIn addition to starting an intentional Christina community,
you could move in with an unrelated nuclear family and eventually make commitments with themOr you can commit to living with some of your biological family 
 
but can I particularly commend this remnuoth solution to you?
The way of these early church city celibates?
because it's been the most successful way celibate Christians have found family historically 
and there's something particularly life-giving about living with people called to the same vocation
who can empathize with you and challenge you 


GET BUSY


[Notes]
So how?
How can we build this kind of family?







Live with 3 people for a year
Pray together once a day + confess to each other once a week
Share 2 meals a week
Serve your neighborhood once a month
Spend 1 vacation and 1 big holiday together
Read a book about discernment and/or community
So get busy

[Notes]
if you think you might be called to the celibacy of Jesus and Paul,
could I challenge you to move somewhere this already exists,
 
or build it yourself 
 
I’m not special.Any of you—empowered by the Holy Spirit—could build this 
 
And you don't have to start big. 
 
just find 3 other people willing to live in an apartment together and commit to celibacy for a year
do some simple prayer together once a dayconfess to each other once a week 
do 2 meals together a weekmaybe serve in your neighborhood together once a monthgo on a vacation togetherdo one of the big holidays togetherread a book about discernment or intentional Christian community together
celebrate kingdom work successes togethermourn loneliness together 

You don’t have to do all of these 
But gather some people, do something for a year, and see what happens 







Don’t wait for your pastor to do it for you.
So get busy
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
while I encourage you to seek out pastors or Christian leaders to help and support you like Thomas did usThomas was the exception rather than the ruleHe was uncommon 
don't wait around for helpBecause by the time help comes, it might be too late 
 
but while I can’t guarantee your church leaders will be able to help you
If you’re interested in starting something like thisI would be more than happy to support you from a distanceTo coach you through different stages 
To be for you what Thomas was for us 
 
If you’d like any support, go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar to let me know and we’ll go from there 

Ohh, and if you’re a church leader and you’d like to help singles in your church build intentional Christian community
like my pastor helped us,
message me through the link
and I’ll followup about how I can help you help the singles in your church


IMAGINE


[Notes]
I want to close with an encouragementBy imagining a future Church where celibate Christians are finding real family
Living in families with other vocational singles
And with married people and their kids 
 
Imagine how the testimony of their faithfulness in vocational singleness might expose the idol of romanceImagine how much kingdom work they could do when they’re thriving instead of struggling to survive 
Imagine them healing their communities by attending to wealth inequality, racial division, homelessness, mental illness, and a lack of care for immigrants and refugees.Imagine them helping married people raise their kids and helping lead our churches
 
Imagine them showing us what it means to enjoy family in the body of Christ and giving all of us hope for how we’ll enjoy family in the New Heavens and New Earth 
And imagine how all of this would bring the gospel alive for those curious about Jesus and draw people to Him
Because a meaningful minority of Christians are willing to give some of the things our world today says are most valuable 
and instead spend their lives healing the wounds of others
All because they really believe that Jesus is who He says He is 
And that the truest life, the fullest life is found laboring shoulder to shoulder next to Him


QUESTIONS

equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
