

NAMING
& Caring for
MALE BODY SHAME

[Notes]
Gay men are twice as likely to struggle with body shame,
yet that shame keeps us from naming our pain and tending to that wound. 
Today I want to explore why gay men are particularly susceptible to body shame,
expose the lies body shame is telling us, and
discover how we can defang those lies with self-awareness and healthy connection.


Pieter Valk, LPC of
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
But first, why should you care what I have to say?
well my name is Pieter Valk

I’m a writer and speaker about vocational singleness and LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
I’ve been published in places like Christianity Today
and taught at over 65 churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries 

I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip—a premier consulting & training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay people thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic
We’ve trained over 11,000 Christian leaders 

I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality 

I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers, an ecumenically Christian monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness 

And I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians seeking to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic 

I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary,
and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University 

each of my jobs has to do with sexuality
and finding belonging in the body of Christ
this work matters to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay 
and I am committed to a traditional sexual ethic

What do I mean when I say “a traditional sexual ethic”?
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom 

Full disclaimer, I'm an Anglican.
I really value ecumenical dialogue, and I'm so grateful to be a guest in your space.
We may disagree about whether Jesus is God, whether Jesus was celibate,
or whether everyone will be celibate in Heaven,
but today we're going to focus on where we have so much agreement:
loving gay people as they discover the most faithful ways to honor God with their sexualities.

Another disclaimer:
we're going to be talking about subclinical levels of body shame
particularly in gay men
we're not going to be talking about clinical levels of eating disorders or related interventions
Also, if listening in on this conversation is too emotionally heavy for you, there's no shame in stepping out

Final note: if you’d like a copy of my full notes after this,
go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
to give me an email address to send them to







"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone.

You're lonely because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."
Lies of Body Shame

[Notes]
Ohh, and one last reason you should care what I have to say:
body shame has been telling me a powerful lie for 20 years:
"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone."
and
"you're lonely because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself.”

this first began when I became aware of my same-sex attractions
in 6th grade, I realized I was gay, and I swore I would never let anyone know who I really was
because I was ashamed and afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that,
and I felt very alone
 
The family and church I grew up in rarely talked about gay people
But when they did it was mostly related to politics
Or a simple statement: God is against homosexuality
It was clear that gay was bad good Christians aren’t supposed to be gay








I felt less-than, gross, and disgusting because of my attractions.

I doubted whether I deserved            the love of my friends or parents.
Lies of Body Shame

[Notes]
I felt less than, gross, disgusting because of my attractions
I doubted whether I deserved the love of my friends or parents

So after realizing I was gay, I tried to change that part of myself
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers for God to make me straight,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could reduce my gayness,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay

I was so afraid of people finding out that I dropped out of theater just so people wouldn’t suspect I was gay
In middle school I played leading roles in both of our theater productions,
but in high school I quickly realized that the same people in the theater club where also in our Gay-Straight Alliance.
I could not risk anyone suspecting that I was gay. No more theater for Pieter.
 
I am most ashamed of the moments where my fear of being outed and disgust of my own sexuality turned to homophobia that hurt others.
I’m haunted by a scene from high school cross country.
Derek was the only openly gay guy in our school and he was on the team.
As we waited at the starting line for a race to begin, everyone paired up for partner stretching.
But one by one as Derek asked the other guys to help him stretch, he was turned away with
“No. Gross! I don’t want to touch you and I don’t want you touching me!”
Then he got to me and I (sheepishly) refused.
I dished out the same pain I had spent tears and prayers to soothe.







I was ashamed. I was afraid. And I was alone.

I thought there was no one else like me.
Lies of Body Shame

[Notes]
I was ashamed. I was afraid.
And I was alone.
I thought there was no one else like me.

I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs,
and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.

But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought),
and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere. I was alone.







In this isolation and loneliness, I yearned for connection, relief, and escape.

But that self-soothing slowly,    sinisterly taught my heart lies.


Lies of Body Shame

[Notes]
in this isolation and loneliness, I yearned for some kind of connection,
some kind of relief, some kind of escape
and like too many teens, I stumbled upon videos of strangers engaging in false intimacy, pornography

and it worked, at least for a season

I didn't feel as alone
I felt some relief
I felt some escape

but that self-soothing slowly, sinisterly taught my heart the lie that to be loved,
I had to look like the perfect men in those videos.
to be enough

every time my brain was flooded with chemicals watching perfect-looking people
connecting in what seemed like the most meaningful, satisfying ways,
it imprinted on my soul that that's what it took not to be alone
that's what you had to look like to be loved
"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone."









"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone.

You're lonely because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."
Lies of Body Shame

[Notes]
so when I felt alone
or saw people who appeared to be loved
or at least who looked "better" than me and I assumed they were getting all of the love they wanted,
body shame quickly provided an explanation:
"It's because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."

when I noticed a friend or a stranger shirtless at the lake or in the pool
strutting 6-pack abs and muscular shoulders
or someone's biceps and veiny arms peaking from under a short-sleeve shirt
or a guy lifting his arms above his head to stretch, revealing some of his stomach under his shirt
or a guy wearing tighter fitting clothes showing off his legs or butt or chest muscles
and then I looked at myself in the mirror and just saw lonely and lumpy 
body shame quickly provided an explanation:
"If you looked like these perfect-looking guys, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."


THE STATS


[Notes]
tragically, body shame is alarmingly common among gay men







Gay men are twice as likely to suffer from eating disorders and body shame compared to straight women.

54% of LGBT adolescents have been diagnosed with a full-syndrome eating disorder during their lifetime.
Studies show…
2X

[Notes]
multiple studies have shown that gay men are twice as likely to suffer from eating disorders and body shame
as straight men and women,
where as lesbian women experience similar levels of eating disorders and body shame as straight women

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0010440X15300663?via%3Dihub
https://europepmc.org/article/med/32449541

Further research has indicated that approximately 54% of LGBT adolescents
have been diagnosed with a full-syndrome eating disorder during their lifetime,
with an additional 21% suspecting that they had an eating disorder at some point during their life

(The Trevor Project, National Eating Disorders Association, & Reasons Eating Disorder Center (2018). Eating Disorders Among LGBTQ Youth: A 2018 National Assessment.)







Gay males significantly more likely than straight males to experience desire to be thin, bingeing, purging, and body dissatisfaction (overly concerned about body shape and size and level of femininity).
Studies show…

[Notes]
Adult sexual minorities have been found to have experienced significant disordered eating symptomology,
including desire to be thin, bingeing, purging, and body dissatisfaction,
which correlated with being overly concerned about body shape and size and level of femininity
(regardless of sex assigned at birth).
And at higher rates than straight males

https://jeatdisord.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40337-020-00327-y


WHY?


[Notes]
why?







Many straight women describe body shame as an awareness that male desire is driven primarily by physical appearance.

”You must look a certain                          way to be loved.”
Why?

[Notes]
well, Many straight women describe their body shame as an "awareness" that male desire is driven primarily by physical appearance.
The lie tells women they must look a certain way to be loved.
that they won't be loved if they dont look that way
and if they aren't getting love and they dont look that way, they have no one to blame but themselves

Yet women don't typically choose who they love based primarily on physical appearance.
50/50 emotional/physical mix
They are *taught* this awareness by advertisers hoping to profit from making women feel inadequate.
and by straight men







But gay men know this intuitively because their desires are also typically driven by physical appearance.

The effect is doubled. They see both themselves and other men this way.
Why?

[Notes]
In contrast, gay men *know* this intuitively
because their desires are typically driven by physical appearance.
They both see men this way and expect gay men to see them this way,
doubling the effects.

To be clear, this is just one form body shame takes.
Body shame has many origins.
And this shouldn't matter to me. I'm committed to vocational singleness.
I'm not seeking or expecting a romantic or sexual relationship with anyone.
But when I'm lonely or feeling any kind of lack, the powerful lie of body shame speaks.


THE PROBLEM


[Notes]
why?







No matter how perfect I look, I can’t shake body shame.

No amount of beauty can              protect us from loneliness.
The Problem

[Notes]
But here's the problem: no matter how perfect I look, I can't shake body shame
my own experience has been that no matter how skinny I get
or how much muscle I put on or how perfect my haircut is
no matter what changes about my appearance
it's never been enough
I experience the same loneliness, not-enough-ness, and shame

and anecdotally, the same has been true for the gay men and straight women in my life
who've shared with me about their body shame
why?
no amount of beauty can protect us from loneliness







"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone. You're lonely because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."

The Problem

[Notes]
take a closer look at the lie:
"If you looked like the perfect-looking guys in pornography, you'd be loved. You wouldn't feel alone."
"you're lonely because you don't look like the guys in videos. It's your fault. You have no one to blame but yourself."







Our core need isn’t to be handsome or beautiful or desired.

It’s to be loved. To be connected in healthy ways. To believe we are enough.
The Problem

[Notes]
do you notice how that the core need at play isn't to be handsome or beautiful
or even desired
it's to not be alone
it's to be connected in healthy ways and believe we are enough
we can't kick body shame by working out or dieting more because those aren't addressing the real problem
it's a lie, a false solution, that keeps us running on a hamster wheel







What version of these lies of body shame have you heard in your life?
Has that shame pushed you to make unhealthy decisions?
Will you ever be handsome or beautiful enough to satisfy those lies?
Turn&Talk
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
I want us to take a few minutes to consider these questions privately or with a person sitting next to you
And then I’ll open it up for some of you to share with the whole group if you’re willing…

if you’d like a copy of my full notes after this,
go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
to give me an email address to send them to



THE SOLUTION


[Notes]
what is the solution then?







Expose the lie
Mourn our unmet needs
Take healthy steps to meet our needs
The Solution

[Notes]
tend to the real need by exposing the lie,
mourn our unmet needs, and
take practical steps to meet your intimacy needs in healthy ways







Expose the lie
Name it, share with others,                  and repeat.
The Solution

[Notes]
expose the lie, name it, bring it into the light
speak it out loud, tell a trusted person
and repeat, each time lie will have less power







Mourn unmet needs
Recognize our need for lifelong, lived-in family with other believers and our painful lack, including the wounds of the closet. Gather with others, mourn the pain, and give yourself time and space.
The Solution

[Notes]
recognize what we really need, where there's really a painful lack
and mourn it

we're made for lifelong, lived-in family with other believers
but for a variety of reasons, many of us don't have that
even if some have found that (in-part) in a mixed-orientation marriage
there were still probably years in the closet when we yearned to be honest
with guy-friends and girl-friends in our life about our story and to enjoy friendship as our full selves
but couldn't
and instead were painfully alone

Some of you might find it helpful to gather with others of similar circumstances who empathize most easily,
hold the pain of loneliness and doubting your worthiness of love before God and each other,
and give yourself time and space to feel







Meet needs in healthy ways
We all need healthy, intimate same-sex friendships. Find your inspiration in Scripture: David and Jonathan, Ruth and Naomi, Jesus and John, and Paul and Timothy.
The Solution

[Notes]
and then get what you need
go get the love and family you need
meet your intimacy needs in healthy ways

for some of you, a mixed-orientation marriage might be part of the solution
but even those in mixed-orientation marriages need healthy friendships in addition to their marriage
what does healthy, intimate friendships with people of the same sex look like?

well, look to Scripture
Many of the pillars of our faith depended on committed friendship to sustain their ministry
David and Jonathan, Ruth and Naomi, Jesus and John, and Paul and Timothy
some of these individual were in opposite sex marriages outside of these deep friendships, some were single
but all found themselves in non-sexual, non-romantic committed friendships
let's call them spiritual friendships







“Don’t urge me to leave you or to turn back from you. Where you go I will go, and where you stay I will stay. Your people will be my people and your God my God. Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if even death separates you and me.”
Spiritual Friendship

[Notes]
Here's how Ruth speaks about her friendship with Naomi in Ruth 1:16-18
But Ruth replied, “Don’t urge me to leave you or to turn back from you. Where you go I will go, and where you stay I will stay. Your people will be my people and your God my God. Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if even death separates you and me.” When Naomi realized that Ruth was determined to go with her, she stopped urging her.







“Jonathan became one in spirit with David, and he loved him as himself. From that day Saul kept David with him and did not let him return home to his family. And Jonathan made a covenant with David because he loved him as himself.”
Spiritual Friendship

[Notes]
Here's how Jonathan felt about his friendship with David in 1 Samuel 18:1-4
After David had finished talking with Saul, Jonathan became one in spirit with David, and he loved him as himself. From that day Saul kept David with him and did not let him return home to his family. And Jonathan made a covenant with David because he loved him as himself. Jonathan took off the robe he was wearing and gave it to David, along with his tunic, and even his sword, his bow and his belt.







“David got up from the south side of the stone and bowed down before Jonathan three times, with his face to the ground. Then they kissed each other and wept together—but David wept the most.”
Spiritual Friendship

[Notes]
And David in 1 Samuel 20:41
David got up from the south side of the stone and bowed down before Jonathan three times, with his face to the ground. Then they kissed each other and wept together—but David wept the most.







Give permission to need each other and ask of each others' time/energy/etc.
Expect to get hurt and commit to forgive
Spiritual kinship, chosen family for marrieds and singles

Spiritual Friendship by Wesley Hill
Spiritual Friendship

[Notes]
We have no reason to believe any of these women or men were same-sex attracted
We have no reason to believe these were secret homoerotic declarations
This kind of spiritual kinship, chosen family, spiritual friendship between people of the same sex
has been common through most of recorded history

Perhaps cultivating friendships like these can help you meet your intimacy needs in healthy ways
and come to believe that you are worth loving
These spiritual friendships let each other need each other and give each other permission to ask of each others' time/energy/etc.
They expect to get hurt and commit to forgive
These friendships were enough to sustain those who were single, and a hearty supplement for those who were married

to learn more, read Spiritual Friendship by Wes Hill







Singles still need lifelong, lived-in family. We need just as much human intimacy.

Come to my breakout tomorrow about building committed community!
Spiritual Friendship

[Notes]
for those of you who don't get married, you still need lifelong, lived-in family
I'd encourage you to come to my breakout tomorrow afternoon
about building intentional Christian community in singleness
because in short, everyone is made for lifelong, lived-in family, including celibate people
we need just as much human intimacy
Every time Jesus and Paul speak of vocational singleness,
they seem to recognize in some way that celibates still need human intimacy in permanent, lived-in family

but how?
we'll explore that question tomorrow







Who could you mourn your body shame with?
Who could you cultivate spiritual friendship with?
What barriers do you anticipate to each?
Turn&Talk
equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
Let’s take another few minutes to consider these questions privately or with a person sitting next to you
And then I’ll open it up again for some of you to share with the whole group if you’re willing…

if you’d like a copy of my full notes after this,
go to equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
to give me an email address to send them to


NOT ALONE

equipyourcommunity.org/northstar

[Notes]
and finally, if you want to, you can exercise and be more careful about what you eat
but you don't have to
I don't have this figured out.
I'm still exploring how to take care of my body by eating well and exercising reasonably
without giving power to body shame.

But perhaps sharing my story will be helpful for some of you out there,
even if I'm still in process.
Maybe you feel similarly, and you'll see you're not alone.


QUESTIONS

equipyourcommunity.org/northstar
