when someone “comes out”

[Notes]
so, how can you respond when someone comes out to you?
let’s define what it means for someone to come out
When someone “comes out”
Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a revisionist sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex sex.

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.

[Notes]
Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.

But often people coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.
When someone “comes out”
Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. People share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.
When someone “comes out”
Avoid words/phrases like
homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual"
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as micro-aggressions.

When someone “comes out”
Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
God wants us to bring the challenges we face to our brothers and sisters in Christ and into the light.
Hiding often leads to shame and spiritual unhealth

Don't share their story with others without their permission.
“Outing” someone betrays their trust and may cause them to trust Jesus less.

Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
As we’ll explore more soon, people do not choose which attractions they develop
and there’s no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
Suggesting the opposite leads to false hope and loss of faith.

Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation.
As we’ll explore more soon, people develop their sexual orientation through a combination of genetic and childhood environmental factors,
but five-year-old’s noticing rainbow flags in their neighborhood or two people of the same sex holding hands
does not increase their likelihood of developing robust, enduring same-sex attractions.

Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.
While some communities talk about addiction (including alcoholism) in more sensitive ways than past decades,
a comparison to alcoholism, for example, still insinuates that the attractions are the same-sex attracted person’s fault
and that their attractions are a form of addiction (neither of which are true).
When someone “comes out”
Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Front Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try practicing term mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to terminology the person uses (or ask them),
ask them what they mean when they use those words,
and then use those same words with those same definitions as an act of hospitality. 

Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation
is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but is instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language and open the door for future conversation.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”
When someone “comes out”
Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed),
make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When someone “comes out”
Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.
Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When someone “comes out”
What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try these questions:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for *early* conversations.
If you already have a discipleship relationship with the individual,
you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship.
Even then, you need to have built up a meaningful amount of relational equity and trust before you directly address sexual ethics.

When someone “comes out”
Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first.

If they’re a Christian but disagree about sex ethics, remember the sins of past Christians against LGBT+ people.

[Notes]
Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
If they’re not Christians yet, don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned gay people to loneliness if committed to celibacy.
When someone “comes out”
Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


soft skills in pastoral care

[Notes]
in addition to what’s already been shared about
practicing term mirroring and listening well
Trust mental health pros
Clinical levels of depression, anxiety, suicidality, trauma, addiction, etc.?

Collaborate with clinical mental health professionals

[Notes]
if they person you’re caring for is struggling with clinical levels of depression, anxiety, suicidality, trauma, addiction, or anything else mental health related
please connect them with professional mental health resources
and continue to serve them pastorally
and collaborate with their mental health professional, as appropriate

remember:
You don’t have to be an expert in everything
Lean on your strengths
Ask for help from others


Pastoral care skills
Give lots of grace
Don’t be too defensive
Encourage authenticity
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
Trust the Holy Spirit
Focus on core questions

[Notes]
here’s some more general pastoral care skills I’d encourage you to lean on
Give lots of grace
Don’t be too defensive
Encourage authenticity
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
Trust the Holy Spirit
Focus on core questions

Give lots of grace
Gay Christians carry a lot of weight related to their sexuality

Avoid forced-choice moments

[Notes]
First, Give lots of grace.
Gay people, especially gay Christians, carry so much weight related to our sexuality.
We felt different from an early age, were often victims of bullying, feared family rejection,
wondered if God hated us, anticipated judgement and rejection at church,
often attempted to repress or hide our attractions or somehow become straight,
endured high levels of loneliness and isolation and depression and stress,
felt we were held to a higher standard of behavior than straight people,
and may have contemplated or attempted suicide.
You may be tempted to challenge the individual to choose between God and his or her gay identity, same-sex romantic relationship, stable view of self, etc.
But forcing this choice will likely lead the individual to reject God in favor of the goodness he or she has found in acceptance, community, and belonging among other LGBTQ+ people.

Instead, give them grace and time and space

You can invite the person to steward his or her sexuality according to a historic sexual ethic for now. 
Then, patiently explore what God believes about sexual stewardship,
why He has ordered the world in this way,
and what that might mean for the person you are walking with.

Give the person time to raise his or her concerns and work through those with the Holy Spirit.
We can trust the power of the gospel and the Holy Spirit to reveal what is true to each of us in HIS time.
Obedience to God’s commands and design can be a very hard road.
Gay people must give up the possibility of romance with and marriage to the person they’re most naturally attracted to,
must navigate a church culture that caters to straight, married people,
and must face Christians and churches who misunderstand or are willfully ignorant of the crosses that gay Christians bear.

Don’t be too defensive
The Church doesn’t get a pass

Give space for LGB people to share where your church could improve

Be willing to apologize

[Notes]
Second, Defend God’s wisdom, but don’t get caught up defending the misguided ways Christians have failed to embody God’s wisdom

Many Christians have made mistakes in the conversation surrounding faith and sexuality.
Many churches aren’t places where gay people can thrive with reasonable effort in their vocation.
Unfortunately, few have apologized.

You don’t need to apologize for your beliefs or say, “I’m sorry for Christianity’s view of marriage.”

But you CAN say, “I’m sorry for how some Christians have mistreated LGBTQ+ people – it really breaks my heart.
I’m sorry that our church isn’t a place where you can find committed, lived-in family right now.
This isn’t the way it’s supposed to be.”

You don’t need to apologize for holding a historic sexual ethic,
but it’s possible that the manner and tone of your belief has hurt someone who’s gay.
A sincere apology can go a long way.
Encourage authenticity
Encourage honesty, authenticity, and integration with oneself, God, and others

[Notes]
Third, Often our distress comes from disintegration
From dishonesty with self, God, or others
From incongruency between what we feel and think and believe

encourage those you minister to to integrate all of these parts of their life
and be honest with themselves, God, and closet family and friends
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
A personal relationship with Jesus is key to wholeness, but for many LGBT+ that relationship has been damaged by other Christians

[Notes]
Fourth, the heart of effective pastoral care is helping the person you are discipling deepen their personal relationship with Jesus.
Unfortunately, many LGB Christians have been hurt deeply by the actions of pastors and church mentors.
For some, even the Bible and prayer have become sources of shame.
This is a catch-22 for gay people.

They will find it difficult to thrive and enjoy wholeness without a personal relationship,
but the primary ways we typically invite Christians into that have been poisoned, at least temporarily.
So how can we navigate this, both to ensure that we’re caring for people well and to encourage deep discipleship?
It is of upmost importance to strike the right balance between encouraging a personal relationship with Jesus,
encouraging Bible reading and prayer, 
and not doing further damage or causing more shame.

For some gay people, this might mean patiently waiting for the Holy Spirit to heal old wounds caused by others who wielded Scripture and prayer as weapons.  
For others, it may mean finding non-threatening ways to include Bible reading and prayer in their lives.
This could mean using corporate prayers that are read aloud together during community group.  
An LGBT person may feel disconnected from private prayer, perhaps having been assured countless times that God would heal them through prayer.  
When He didn’t, prayer became a reminder of their failure to pray hard enough or God’s failure to act.  
Corporate prayer may be a way for LGBT+ people to engage in prayer safely.

This could mean avoiding “God is my friend”-type worship music.  
For someone who has been convinced that God is disappointed or disgusted with them because of something they can’t control (their sexual attraction), God isn’t a friend.  
He’s more like an angry giant.  
Instead, churches can choose music that leans on theology or corporate lament or praise instead of emotion-driven appeals.

This may mean that God doesn’t “speak to” everyone when they read Scripture and that not everyone will benefit from a “personal devotion” or “quiet time.”  
And being ok with Scripture used as learning about God’s character and the way He wants us to live.  
Not everyone will find a personal meaning in Scripture that fits their exact circumstance and walk away from Bible study feeling that they were “fed” or “filled.”  
Offer these Christians other ways to engage in Scripture and deepen their understanding of the character of God that isn’t dependent on emotions.
Of course, we hope that Bible-reading and prayer eventually lose their shame-producing capabilities.  
We want gay people to think of God as a loving brother and hear His voice.  
But for many LGB people, that’s not the reality right now.  
And it may never be.  
So we can get creative with our discipling efforts.


Trust the Holy Spirit
Be patient with the Holy Spirit and be a consistent presence in their life.

God’s wisdom will seem inconvenient and unfair to many, so give them time and space to process.

[Notes]
fifth, Be patient with the Holy Spirit and be a consistent presence in their life.

God’s wisdom will seem inconvenient and unfair to many,
so give them time and space to process.

Focus on core questions
Redirect from sexual ethics to core questions of faith:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
And sixth, remember, debate about sexual ethics is often too emotionally loaded to be helpful
Instead, redirect questions about sexual ethics to discussion about more fundamental questions of faith

dig deeper into whether they believe there is a God
whether they trust that God knows what’s best for them
and what they believe is the most reliable way to discover God’s wisdom for them

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Care for closet wounds
Many gay people make sense of their sexuality alone in the closet and develop…
anxiety
depression
suicidality
body shame
unhealthy coping mechanisms (particularly sexual addiction)
internalized homophobia

[Notes]
once you’ve established a good baseline for pastoral care
you can begin addressing one of the big needs for many who you’ll minister to: the wounds of the closet
what are closet wounds?

many gay people spent years, or even a decade, privately making sense of their sexuality
without the love and wisdom of their parents
alone with the lies of the Enemy
many many developed wounds of the closet from that tortured isolation:
anxiety
depression
suicidality
unhealthy coping mechanisms (particularly sexual addiction)
body shame
internalized homophobia

Compared to their straight peers, gay people are…
4X more likely to attempt suicide
2.5X more likely to struggle with anxiety or depression
2X more likely to deal with body shame (gay males)

We don’t time/space to cover in-depth how to provide care around each of these specific wounds
My hunch is you can find some high-quality resources about pastoral care generally for people navigating anxiety, depression, suicidality, body shame, and sexual addiction
So I’ll make a quick note about sexual addiction and then share a bit more in depth about internalized homophobia

Briefly, I want to be clear: LGBT+ does not automatically mean sex addict
But, for many gay people who have felt the need to hide their sexuality and experience anxiety and depression from that hiding
Porn offers escape/numbing from painful emotions
And a false sense of connecting with others they are secretly drawn to
So gay people are particularly vulnerable to developing addictive habits with pornography
that later lead to addictive use of hookup apps
Be prepared to offer care around this and connect people with effective sex addiction resources/support
But also make clear that you don’t assume they’re a sex addict just because they’re gay or think that same-sex attractions are inherently some form of sex addiction
Internalized homophobia
The Enemy tricks closeted gay people into believing that the best way to please God is to hate oneself.

Encourage them to share their story with safe people and notice whether they respond with love.

[Notes]
I do want to equip you in more depth around internalized homophobia

remember that horrible stereotype about gay people that I mentioned I heard growing up:
that gay people all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs,
and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.

well, a very common experience of the closet is that closeted gay people internalize that homophobia
we actually learn to be homophobic ourselves
we learn to hate gay people
and hate ourselves
because we think that’s the best way to make God happy

it’s a sad, twisted, destructive form of shame
commonly, the Enemy tricks gay people into believing that if we just hate ourselves enough, perhaps our attractions would go away
or we would be able to master our attractions
or at least if we can’t get rid of our attractions and keep messing up, we’ll show God how much we hate ourselves
and how much we despise ourselves
that maybe God will be more likely to forgive us
and be willing to tolerate us

this internalized homophobia can linger
years later, a gay person might find themselves afraid to be friends with other gay people
not only because they’re afraid to cross boundaries
but because at some core level, they think gay people are bad

there’s an inner yuck that they haven’t gotten rid of
and that internalized homophobia might lead them to hate anything related to pride
or anything flamboyant

for some people, they break the spell of internalized homophobia by first having compassion on other gay people
and then learning to extend that same compassion toward themselves

for me, I remember this moment in college when a gay atheist on our campus was being bullied
and in the midst of that, he shared with me his story of growing up in the Church but being bullied and finding it impossible to believe that a loving God existed
and in that moment, I found myself filled with so much compassion for him
so much desire for God to do whatever possible to reach into this guy’s heart and undo all of the pain and injury from the bullying he’d experienced
and that compassion for him for some reason flipped a switch in me
I was suddenly able to have compassion on myself as well

for many, they have to experience other Christians loving them before they can believe God would love them
every time they share their story and a Christian responds by drawing closer instead of pushing away, it makes it a little bit easier to believe

I’ve found Eve Tushnet’s book Tenderness to be a powerful resource around pushing back on internalized homophobia
and for anyone who’s a survivor of pray-the-gay-away practices, watching the moving Boy Erased can be a powerful experience to grow compassion for self and others
Sexual addiction
Using porn, masturbating, or having sex more frequently than they’d like to without the ability to reduce/stop
Reduce access with filters, blocks, and accountability
Meet intimacy needs in healthy ways and connect with painful emotions

[Notes]
If a person you’re ministering to uses pornography, masturbates, or engages in sex with others
More frequently than they would like to
And they are unable to reduce/stop
Then they may have an addictive relationship with sex

I want to be clear: LGBT+ does not automatically mean sex addict
But, for many gay people who have felt the need to hide their sexuality and experience anxiety and depression from that hiding
Porn offers escape/numbing from painful emotions
And a false sense of connecting with others they are secretly drawn to
So gay people are particularly vulnerable to developing addictive habits with pornography

So what do you do?
Reduce Access and Meet the Real Need
Reduce access by taking practical steps to make it more difficult to see pornography or use dating apps
Filters on devices
Accountability reports to peers

And meet the real need
What sexual addiction covers up are painful emotions we don’t want to connect with
And loneliness
So teach those you minister to to notice their emotions and honor them
That painful emotions are unavoidable, but if we postpone them, they just get worse
And encourage them to meet their needs for connection in healthy ways
But emphasize that being lonely doesn’t necessarily mean to need romance or sex
It just means we need people in our life who we can be honest with and will be honest with us
People who we know their story and they know ours
People who feel safe and who we can spend time with
So help them identify people he could be that kind of friend for them
And encourage them to cultivate that friendship
Mourn closet wounds
Hold space to grieve wounds of the closet:
Honor the pain and unfairness
Grieve the ways they linger and haunt
Name the present burdens from the failures of past Christians

[Notes]
In general, hold space for those you’re ministering to to grieve the wounds of the closet
help them honor how painful and unfair that anxiety, depression, suicidality, body shame, addiction, and internalized homophobia have benn

mourn the years of childhood and teen years that were lost
the lost sense of who you were, of self-worth, of authenticity and showing up in the world as you

grieve the ways those wounds still linger and haunt them
name the unfairness of the failures of the Church and the ways those burdens continue to weigh down gay Christians today
Accept brokenness
Practice surrender around enduring brokenness/suffering.

Balance self-conceptualization of broken sexuality using three lenses: integrity, disability, and diversity.

[Notes]
i’ve got five more suggestions for pastoral care of sexual minorities
first, help them practice some acceptance around enduring brokenness in their life

Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life.
Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness.
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls!

Help gay Christians you’re ministering to explore what Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering
and how they found a way to accept persisting brokenness.
And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.

Some pain will be unavoidable.

Those you minister to might find it easier to accept enduring brokenness if they’re offered a more nuanced way to conceptualized their same-sex attractions
Mark Yarhouse suggested that there’s three lenses through which Christians can view and seek to understand same-sex attractions:
the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.

The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of same-sex attractions and how Christians respond.
Generally, when Christians use the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask,
“What actions are sins? What actions are seemingly morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?”
If Christians seek to understand same-sex attractions exclusively through the integrity lens,
they would primarily explore whether same-sex romantic or sexual activity are sinful.

The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness
that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian
and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps
to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people.
When Christians view same-sex attractions through the disability lens, they recognize that same-sex attraction is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world,
but those navigating same-sex attractions do not choose to experience those attractions nor is there a reliable method for eliminating those attractions.
Christians seeking to understand same-sex attractions through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches
to care for gay people with God’s love and wisdom as those gay people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.

The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ.
When Christians who hold a revisionist sexual ethic view SSAs through the diversity lens,
they see the gay experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God.
However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand SSAs through the diversity lens,
they ask how a Christian faithfully navigating SSAs may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ
particularly from stewarding their brokenness
(while recognizing that God did not intend for anyone to experience SSAs).

As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand SSAs through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate.
Like a kaleidoscope, we appreciate the complexity of SSAs when we stack all three lenses on top of each other
and seek to understand SSAs through them simultaneously.
There are simultaneously moral questions,
an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating SSAs with the support they need to thrive,
and an opportunity to recognize and appreciate the spiritual gifts gay Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus.

If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses,
we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses,
with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens.
This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom
while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating SSAs to do so faithfully.
Meet intimacy needs
We’re all made for human connection in the context of community.

Encourage gay Christians to proactively meet their healthy intimacy needs in non-romantic, non-sexual ways.

[Notes]
second, encourage them to meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways

we are all made for connection in the context of community
that’s no less true for lgbt+ people, even if they feel called to walk out celibacy

as we’ll explore in greater detail later in our section about sexual stewardship for all people,
if any of us ignore our healthy needs for intimacy, broken parts of us will eventually compel us to reach out for self-destructive shortcuts

the solution isn’t to learn how to starve ourselves and clench our fists even more effectively
instead the solution is to actively meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways

as we’ll explore more later, none of us need romance or sex to meet our intimacy needs
but everyone needs healthy physical and emotional intimacy
including lgbt+ people who feel called to walk out celibacy

name and honor that in their lives
and support them in their efforts to develop healthy intimacy in their friendships
Solidify convictions
Hold space for gay Christians to externally process what they find inconsistent or unfair about God’s wisdom so they can eventually solidify their convictions.

[Notes]
third, help them solidify their convictions

don’t rush this
if you try to force someone to “choose a side” before they’ve addressed lingering closet wounds
before they’ve done some acceptance work around brokenness
before they’ve been meeting their intimacy needs in healthy ways
then they’re bound to choose a revisionist sexual ethic
not based on logic
but out of their pain and desperation and felt sense of unfairness

but after you’ve addressed those,
eventually people desire the stability that comes from really working through their theological questions and landing solidly somewhere

but they’re going to need intellectually honest space to point out what seems inconsistent or unfair or unclear about God’s wisdom as it’s been presented to them
and you’re gonna need to work through that stuff with them

be honest when you both feel like you don’t have good enough answers
and reach out to peope who are even more experts when you get stuck
Clarify vocation
Many in uncommitted singleness find it difficult to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work.

Support their discernment and help them settle down into vocational singleness or a mixed orientation marriage.

[Notes]
fourth, help them clarify their vocation

once you’ve supported them in all of the ways weve already mentioned
and they’ve solidly landed on a historic sexual ethic
they’ll experience more thriving and stability in life if they actually discern between vocational singleness and MOM
and settle down into one or the other
and move out of involuntary singleness

as we’ll explore more later, every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between
vocational singleness and Christian marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
including LGBT+ Christians

this doesn’t mean that I think every gay Christian has to date someone of the opposite sex
but at means at least being emotionally and theologically open to the possibility
and genuinely discerning both

If we’re going to ask straight Christians to discern both, we’ve got to ask gay Christians to discern both

As for the impacts of never committing to vocational singleness
and instead defaulting to long-term singleness in a way that might feel forced and involuntary
I think there’s lot of dangers associated with that
I’d commend to you a lengthy essay I wrote on this exact topic titled “From Involuntary Celibacy to Thriving”
at pieterLvalk dot com

in short, involuntary celibacy leads to self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing that Satan uses to tempt us to self-destruction
instead, we’ve got to own our celibacy because there are significant advantages to being all-in. 
And discernment can help us own our celibacy.
You see, discernment is about much more than just identifying the most likely path forward.
It's also about accepting, embracing, choosing, taking a leap of faith, seeking confirmation, and stepping forward.
Discernment can help us move from seeing our celibacy as involuntary to seeing our celibacy as chosen.

I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.
Connect with community
Those called to vocational singleness need lifelong, lived-in human family.

And it’s the responsibility of the Church to cultivate that community. So get busy!

[Notes]
and fifth, help them connect with community

long-term, they’re going to need much more than just a revolving door of roommates and small groups
don’t you?
we are all made for lifelong, lived-in human family
including those called to vocational singleness
including lgbt+ people called to vocational singleness
we’ll explore more how we know that

and The Church has a rich history of offering vocational singles robust family in the body of Christ.
during the first five centuries of the Church, the most common form of celibacy was what was called city monks
who made lifetime commitments to celibacy, lived in cities in homes with other celibacy and had normal jobs,
but used their availability to serve the poor and needy in their city for the sake of the gospel

and the Church accepted the responsibility to cultivate these communities for celibate people
In Acts 6, we see that the first administrative act of the Church was to provide a home and family for celibate women

Acts 6 verses 1-7 describes a scene where immigrant widows were being accidentally neglected.
The love of Jesus was drawing unmarried people to the church—thank the Lord!
But the need had become too great to be met organically and too great for those called to primarily preach/teach to also take care of these celibate women.
Yet they recognized that it was the responsibility of the Church,
so they empowered other leaders to take care of these practical responsibilities and they resourced that work.

Then fast forward to 1 Timothy 5, Paul is talking about the proper care of widows.
And what do we see?
A house of widows, the beginnings of one of these city celibate homes, a place where celibate women are finding family!

While Paul is holding some of those women accountable for unfaithfulness and offering some lesser-of-two-evils-accommodations,
topline he’s still affirming that it would be best if they kept their commitments to permanent celibacy and family together in the house of widows.

Clearly the Church had by 1 Timothy 5 made good on its commitment in Acts 6 to provide for widows, for celibate women, not only to have food, but to have a home and a family.
That was the first administrative act of the Church.
It’s what leads to establishing the first generation of church leaders after the apostles.
Providing for celibate people is what the Church was created to do.
So get busy!

honor the broken reality and unmet need
accept responsibility
gather singles
inspire intentional Christian community
help them take early steps
support logistically and emotionally


