God’s Love& Wisdom for Gay People

[Notes]
Today we’re going to be taking the next step in equipping you to offer God’s love and wisdom to gay people.
sexual stewardship for everyone

[Notes]
and I think this is key: gay people don’t need a different version of the bible
or a different version of God’s wisdom
they need the same wisdom as straight Christians

but if your church isn’t yet inviting straight Christians to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways,
then you cant invite gay people to do that

so how do you invite everyone, and in particular straight people, to do that?

What did God make us for?

Some think God doesn’t want us to have fun.

Some think they need as much sex/romance as possible with the most attractive people to be most happy.

[Notes]
start with exploring what God made us for as sexual beings

what does God want us to do with our sexuality?
and what do we want?
some people think God wants us to have no fun
to show our love for him by learning to be content with loneliness and dissatisfaction
to obsess about avoiding sin
and some of us think that what we want is to have as much sex and romance with the most attractive people we can convince to be with us

both of those are off
that's not what God wants
and that's not what we really want
What did God make us for?

We want genuine connection, lasting community, to know and be known.

God wants the same for us! He made each of us for connection in the context of community.

[Notes]
we want genuine connection
we want to not be lonely
we want community
we want love that lasts
we want richer, more meaningful, steady relationship
we want to feel safe
to trust that the people who love us love us well and keep doing so until we die
we want people to go on this life journey with who truly know us
and therefore know how to accompany us well on that journey
and we want to offer the same to others
and enjoy the delight that can only be achieved after decades of that knownness

and God wants those same things for us
our capacity for connection and need for community isn't a test
it's a gift
he made us in his image to enjoy intimacy with Him and each other
and he wants us to enjoy that to the fullest
Made for connection in the context of community

Two best paths: vocational singleness and Christian marriage

Brokenness tempts us to settle for less. But thankfully, God has offered us warning and wisdom.

[Notes]
He first made the world perfectly and imagined all of us connecting with each other in community.
And He gave us two best ways, two different but equally good paths for enjoying connection:
vocational singleness and Christian marriage.

But unfortunately humans have consistently chosen to ignore God's wisdom and trust their own ideas over God's,
leading to brokenness in every part of the world and ourselves.
he knows that in a broken world we will be tempted to settle for less than the fullest life

Thankfully, God looked over our broken world and broken selves,
and He shared with us in the teachings of Jesus and others
warnings about what will cause us harm and to avoid those
plus wisdom about the best ways we can still enjoy connection in community
He gave us direction for how to enjoy our sexuality to the fullest
What is sexual stewardship?

God has given each of us the task of managing our need for community and our capacity for connection.

But our sexualities are just one of many opportunities for stewardship!

[Notes]
Or to put it another way, God has invited us to steward our sexualities

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul admonishes Corinthian Christians for their sexual immorality and calls them to sexual stewardship:

“Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies.” —vv. 19–20

Our bodies were made by and given to us by God.
All have sold their bodies to the slavery of sin with our disobedience.
Yet Christ in his mercy paid the price for that sin, bought us back and chose to dwell in us.
Our bodies are not our own.
They are dwelling places for the Holy Spirit that we’ve been given to steward on this side of heaven
until we receive our perfected resurrected bodies for the New Jerusalem.

So sexual stewardship refers to our God-given task of managing our capacity for friendship, family, romance, and sex and our need for healthy intimacy.
As believers, we all called to steward, to carefully and faithfully manage, multiple aspects of our lives in ways that honor God:
finances, the environment, eating and exercise, sleep, mental health, meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways,
character development, and how we leverage our 9-to-5 jobs for the sake of the kingdom.
Faithfully stewarding each of our sexualities is just one of those tasks, but an important one!

Framing conversation around sexual stewardship is helpful because it zooms out from focusing only on sex and marriage
Too often, a simple “save sex for marriage” mantra suggests that marriage and sex are something that we are owed and can take.
That we have a right to seek our pleasure, as long as we follow the rules.
Instead, a focus on sexual stewardship more broadly includes vocational singleness and suggests that marriage and sex aren’t forgone conclusions.
The phrase “sexual stewardship” properly identifies our sexualities as a gift from God
that we are meant to fearfully and faithfully steward before God based on his wisdom, not based on our pleasure.

How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.
Made for connection in the context of community

[Notes]
So let's start with the basics:
God created you for connection in the context of community

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.

God is a being in community.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a community called the Trinity.
Then when Jesus died on the cross for our sins and resurrected, He made a way for all of us to join the Trinity in God’s family.
You see, God enjoys perfect connection in the Trinity, and while Christians don’t always love God perfectly, He loves us perfectly in the big family of God.
Because we’re made in God’s image, designed to imitate God, we’re also made for connection in communities.




sexuality =

our need to be in community

+ our capacity to connect with other humans
Connection in Community

[Notes]
We call our need to be in community, our capacity to connect with other humans, “sexuality.”

You see, often when people talk about sexuality, they use that word narrowly to only refer to romance and sex.
But there's so much more to our sexuality than just romance and sex.
Even if God calls you to Christian marriage and to enjoy romance and sex in that context,
you'll spend at least the first couple decades of your life unmarried and you might end up spending the last decade or two of your life unmarried, as a widow.
Others of you will never marry.




Even if you get married, most of your connection will be non-romantic and nonsexual
Connection in Community

[Notes]
And even if you get married, your spouse will just be one of many people you'll interact with each day.
You’ll interact with coworkers, friends, any children you have, and other family members.
Do you see what I'm getting at?
Regardless of whether you get married, most of your interactions with other people in your life will be non-romantic and non-sexual,
yet those interactions will still be meaningful connection.
When God made us to be relational creatures,
He intended for most of our connections with each other, most of the times we engage our sexuality, to be non-romantic and non-sexual.




Our need to know others and be known, to give and receive love
We don't need romance/sex to meet our needs for connection
We have physical bodies + intellectual minds + emotional/spiritual soul, so we need connection on each of those levels
Our sexuality is…


[Notes]
So how can we think more broadly about sexuality and our created need and capacity for connection in the context of community?

More generally, our sexuality is our need to know others and be known by others.
to give and receive love
But I'm not just talking about romantic love.
This also includes brotherly and sisterly love. Friend love.

That’s key to understand: we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection.
And the Bible never promises romance or sex to people who follow God.
Let me explain.

One way to think about our needs for connection is to imagine a set of buckets that need to be filled with water.
Each of the buckets represent a kind of connection we need and the water is the connection.
Because we each have a physical body and an intellectual mind and an emotional and spiritual soul,
God designed us to need and have connection on a physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual level.





[Notes]
Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.”


emotional connection = having convos that help you connect w/ gladness, fear, anger, or sadness in you (or others)

[Notes]
When I say emotional connection, I mean having conversations that help you connect with gladness or fear or anger or sadness inside of you, and where you notice some of those same things in others.


spiritual connection = connecting that makes you feel more connected to God (talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, worshiping together)

[Notes]
When I say spiritual connection, I mean connecting in a way that makes you feel more connected to God, by talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, or worshiping together.


physical connection = hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, etc.

[Notes]
When I say physical connection, I mean a hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, and yes, kissing and cuddling and sex.


intellectual connection = exchanging and exploring ideas with another person

[Notes]
When I say intellectual connection, I mean exchanging and exploring ideas with another person.


[Notes]
Now some would argue that there is a fifth bucket labeled “sexual.”
That we all need sexual connection to be whole, and if we don’t get it, we will feel empty.
But I know plenty of people who have never had sex and who are full adults.
They share with me that they have vibrant social lives, rich connection, and a satisfying experience of community.

That’s been true in my own life.
The healthy emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual connection I have experienced in friendships
has been much more satisfying than the broken physical connection I have experienced in the past.
In contrast, I’ve known lots of single people who haven't followed God's wisdom and have had sex outside of marriage.
But despite the beautiful photos they post on instagram
When I talk to them one-on-one, they share with me that they feel empty.
That it's fun in the moment, but they're always living in fear of the person leaving 
or they’re afraid to let the other person really know them because they might break up tomorrow.

so no, we don't need romance or sex to be happy or whole people

Jesus didn’t have sex. 
Paul was committed to celibacy (+many Christian leaders in the past 2000 years)
Matthew 22:30 says there won’t be marriage/sex in heaven.
The Bible doesn’t teach that we need marriage/sex or promise them


[Notes]
Plus, the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or romance to be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Jesus is the example of what it means to be fully human,
so clearly romance and sex aren’t necessary to be fully human.

Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the early leaders in the Church were celibate.
And in Matthew 22:30, Jesus suggests that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex
because the non-romantic, non-sexual ways we'll connect with God and each other will be 1000 times better than any romance or sex in this life



[Notes]
Instead, there are four connection buckets. Emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual.
God provides a good chunk of our spiritual connection.
Those who are married will partially fill each of those buckets with the connection they experience in their marriage.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t fill your connection buckets.
You will still need emotional connection, intellectual connection, physical connection, and spiritual connection from friendship.

Share
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?
Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

[Notes]
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?

Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

What best paths did God provide?

[Notes]
okay, so we’ve described what God made us for as sexual beings
next, let’s explore the best paths God has given us to enjoy our sexualities to the fullest!

God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?

God designed two best ways/vocations for Christians to enjoy connection in the context of community:
Vocational Singleness
Christian marriage
*How* can we connect in community?

[Notes]
In short, God has designed two paths for Christians to do that,
two vocations
and He wants to give some of us the gift to walk down one of those paths and others the gift to walk down the other path:
Vocational singleness and Christian marriage
both of these are particular ways adult Christians can enjoy connection in the context of community

This is *THE* key lever of God-honoring and life-giving sexual stewardship
If you want the most satisfying connection in community for a lifetime
Then accept the gift that God wants to give you
And live fully into God’s design for the vocation He gave you

The key to sexual stewardship isn’t focusing on what we’re supposed to say “no” to
More often than not, when I meet lonely, disconnected, relationally wounded people
It’s because there are ways they could more fully say “yes” to God’s calling for their lives
And His design for that vocation


Why “vocation”?

A Christian vocation is a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision.

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation?
Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 
Why “vocation”?

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom.

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

How are Christians called to steward their sexuality?

[Notes]
As this diagram depicts, we’re all first called to a period of temporary singleness
during which we discern whether we’re called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage

As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of a prolonged temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

I want to sit here a second
These distinctions were mind-blowing for me when I first saw them in Scripture

None of us are on a default path
Not supposed to just take what we want
Shouldn’t continue in the limbo of uncommitted singleness
Two options
Both equally good and normal but one more common
Need to ask God which He wants me to do
I won’t get the gift from God to do either well until I step out of temporary singleness and COMMIT
Share
What are some gaps in the ways we teach about and support singleness/marriage for straight people that makes LGBT+ ministry harder?
What steps could we take to address those gaps (for the benefit of both straight and gay people?)

[Notes]
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?

Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
So where do we start?
Well, we’re are all first called to a temporary period of abstinent singleness
in which we enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ in non-sexual, non-romantic companionship.

A period of temporary singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong vocational singleness nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
We should all learn to do this well

This is a calling to neither vocational singleness nor marriage
—defining our default calling in the negative is not sufficient but it is informative—
we are not yet called to vocational singleness or to marriage. 

We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires,
want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 

We should all submit our sexuality to God, study what the Scriptures have to say about sexual stewardship,
and discern with God and spiritual mentors in our lives whether we are called to vocational singleness or marriage.

Why distinguish between temporary and vocational singleness?
singleness we’re born into + waiting for marriage vs. committed + lifetime for the single-minded kingdom work
uncommitted singles feel shallowly rooted in kingdom work and spiritual family
Jesus + Paul commend one, not the other
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
But why distinguish between temporary singleness and vocational singleness?

Well, there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children
vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage
vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

But I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.

Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage Christians to consider kingdom singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
—they’re commending committed, lifetime singleness.

In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.
So if someone is in temporary singleness, without the gift of singleness, and struggling, perhaps part of the difficult is that they haven’t receive the gift yet

the Church has consistently taught that it is NOT God’s intention for Christians to continue in temporary for a lifetime
For the vast majority, it is better to settle down into vocational singleness or marriage
That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness.
For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage,
continuing into their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life.
While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.
 



Discernment

[Notes]
Okay, so there’s a difference between temporary and vocational singleness
I’ve got a sense of how to do temporary singleness well
But why should I discern? And how do I discern?

we did a whole webinar on this earlier in 2023
but I’ll briefly review today



Why should everyone discern?

Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen
Why discern?

[Notes]
Everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference

Why?
because
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

In some ways, our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

At this point, you might point out that in Matt 19:12, Jesus speaks of “choosing” to live like a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom?
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?

Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into vocational singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.

Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.

We should also discern God’s calling, ask God to show us why that is best for us, be patient for our heart to grow to desire God’s best for us,
and then choose to accept God’s gift!


A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness.
Why discern?

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.

Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.
We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.

In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come naturally to us.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.

So we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness

speaking of which
Still others might say, “Well, doesn’t 1 Corinthians 7:9 say that if you find abstinence difficult, you’re called to marriage?”

That’s a common interpretation
It’s actually more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
“Discernment” in the Bible?

Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.

[Notes]
Now, admittedly, is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no

but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church,
and the only two Protestant theologians to offer systematic theologies of celibacy: Max Thurian and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift,
if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly

how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?

DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of singleness or a vocational of marriage.
And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference




Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
How to Discern

[Notes]
what, then, does it look like to ask God this question?
to give God a chance?
to discern?

Here’s 5 sugg estions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.



Share
How might teens and young adults in your community respond to an invitation to discern? What theological re-education might be needed?

[Notes]
How might teens and young adults in your community respond to an invitation to discern?
What theological re-education might be needed?

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those

“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
We’ve already established that God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
Plus, the early Church unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be teaching about a permanent commitment to celibate singleness
The disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples, unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy, instead of waiting for marriage.
We’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus. 

“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship

“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.

But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.

Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

How can we thrive in vocational singleness?
voluntarily commit in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
In light of this, how can we do vocational singleness well if we’re called to it?
voluntarily commit to it in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling with vocational singleness
if you’re walking out longterm singleness involuntarily
or haven’t taken the time to discern God’s calling
or haven’t made an intentional, lifelong commitment
or aren’t using your vocational singleness to serve the poor and need in some meaningful way
or are trying to do vocational singleness alone or with a revolving door of roommates and church family
then perhaps you’ll find thriving by leaning into one of those
Share
What steps might your church need to take to support thriving in vocational singleness, regardless of sexual orientation?

[Notes]
What steps might your church need to take to support thriving in vocational singleness, regardless of sexual orientation?

Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

Christian marriage…

Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…

Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.

In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce,
giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention.

Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence,
but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception,
and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception.

Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce.

Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage
or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine
(1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman…

God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman

God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman
and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage.

In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband.

Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)


Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, & life-giving to remind us that
God will never abandon us
there is beautiful differentness in the Trinity & between Jesus+Church
the Trinity & Jesus+Church are life-sustaining
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
in particular, it's important that Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, and life-giving.

Christian marriages are supposed to be for a lifetime. There are very few grounds for Biblical divorce and remarriage.
This faithfulness in Christian marriage displays the gospel because it remind us that God will never abandon us.

Christian marriages are supposed to be complimentary. The complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically in Christian marriage
displays the gospel by pointing back to the different-ness in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

And Christian marriage are supposed to be a space for raising children,
pointing us back to the life-giving nature of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church.

How can we thrive in Christian marriage?
Commit intentionally after a period of discernment
Seen as a gift/calling from God to labor
Recognize the gospel nature + potential to testify to Christ’s love
Take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
Revere lifetime nature
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
In light of this, how can couples thrive in Christian marriage?
make sure your marriage is entered into intentionally after a period of discernment
see your marriage as a gift and calling from God to labor for the sake of the kingdom
recognize the gospel nature of your Christian marriage and potential to testify to Christ’s love
take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
recognize that divorce in God’s eye is almost never an option (so dig deep)

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling in your Christian marriage
taking your marriage for granted as something the universe owes you
seeing your marriage as ordinary and for your own happiness
believing that a call to Christian marriage is less sacrificial or less kingdom-focused than celibacy
stewarding the marriage to maximize your comfort instead of your kingdom impact
resisting the difficult work of maintaining the marriage by allowing yourself to consider divorce
Share
How does inconsistency around the lifelong and life-raising nature of Christian marriage impact our credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
How does inconsistency around the lifelong and life-raising nature of Christian marriage impact our credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom?

Why follow God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
SKIP???

admittedly, these are high standards for sexual stewardship
this is culturally inconvenient wisdom
so why follow it?


If a god exists, he’s the God of the Bible, and that God knows what is best for us—we’d be fools not to follow God’s wisdom

God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life
Why follow God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
God seems to have a lot of rules for how we should seek out intimacy and family.
Why follow God’s wisdom about intimacy and family?

If we believe that a god exists, if we believe that god is the God of the Bible, and if we believe that God knows what is best for us
—if we really believe all of those things, we would be fools not to follow God’s wisdom.

If Lebron James was your basketball coach and you ignored his advice about how to become a better basketball player, you’d be a fool!
How much better advice does God have about the ways to enjoy the most goodness and beauty and meaning in this life? Trust Him!

We have been designed, by God, for specific purposes. That matters.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we allow ourselves to live in ways we weren’t designed to, we get hurt.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we use romance, marriage, and sex contrary to God’s design, it brings pain to our lives.

If God’s wisdom is best for us, following His teachings will save us from unnecessary pain of figuring out the best paths through trial and error.
Plus, God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life.

my story

[Notes]
So, why do each of my jobs have to do with sexuality and finding belonging in the body of Christ?
Why do these different kingdom callings matter to me?
Well, because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic Christian sexual ethic

God’s best for every Christian is either
Vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention) or
Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the kingdom).
Historic Christian sexual ethic

[Notes]
I’m going to use that phrase “historic Christian sexual ethic” often today, so let me clarify what I mean by that.

In my opinion, a historic Christian sexual ethic is a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either

vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)

or Christian marriage
(which is a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family
Good News for Gay People
Is the gospel great news for gay people?

[Notes]
AMBER

I want to start with a simple question
But probably the most important question

Is the gospel great news for gay people?
Or let’s lower the bar: Is the gospel at least good news for gay people?
It doesn’t seem like it.

Too often, churches seem to teach that the God of the Bible is not for gay people. That God hates gay people. That the best things He offers are not for them.

At best, churches are silent. They just don’t address same-sex sexual attraction at all.

Then friends with a more progressive sexual ethic tell the same story but in a different way.
They say that the Bible—or at least how we’re read the Bible for the past 2,000 years—is bad news for gay people. That the God of the Bible has nothing good to offer gay people.

Our churches and our friends would lead us to believe that God’s teachings are bad news for sexual minorities.

And for good reason.
Good News for Gay People
22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US
19.3 million (86%) grew up in church
10.4 million (54%) have left the faith

[Notes]
AMBER

In the most extensive study of LGBT+ people and the Church, Andrew Marin’s Us Versus Us reveals that out of the 22.4 million LGBT+ people in the US, 
19.3 million (86%) grew up in church.

Of those, 10.4 million LGBT+ people have left the faith—that’s 54% of LGBT+ people who grew up in the Church leaving the faith.
Good News for Gay People
Gay teens are 5x more likely to attempt suicide
Religious LGBT+ youth are 38% more likely to be suicidal
Gay teens from highly rejecting families are 8.4x more likely to attempt suicide

[Notes]
AMBER

Why? Let’s look at some statistics
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their peers.
LGBT+ youth who say religion is important to them are 38% more likely to be suicidal than their non-religious LGBT+ peers,
suggesting that homophobic religious beliefs increase teens’ vulnerability to depression.
And gay teens who come from highly rejecting families—many of which are religious--are 8.4 times more likely to attempt suicide than other gay teens.

Good News for Gay People
Hate crimes are committed against LGBT+ people every day
73% of LGBT+ people view evangelical churches as unfriendly

[Notes]
AMBER

Hate crimes are perpetrated against LGBT people every day.
And according to the Pew Research Center, 73% of LGBT people view evangelical churches as unfriendly.

Share
What painful life experiences have the gay people in your life endured that has led them to doubt whether God’s wisdom is actually good for them?

[Notes]
AMBER
what do I believe?

[Notes]
PIETER

In light of my story and my faith, what have I come to understand God’s wisdom for my life to be?
I’m gonna share about this for a couple of reasons
To be clear. Clarity is charity.
Queer people and increasing all people prefer for Christian leaders to be clear in respectful ways about what they believe rather than intentionally or accidentally carrying out a bait-and-switch
(2) For those who agree with me,
perhaps I can offer you more winsome ways to share about your convictions
(3) For those of you who disagree,
I want to invite you to listen to my words with fresh ears.
Even if we continue to disagree on our final conclusions,
I hope you see that there are reasonable, compassionate ways Christians can hold a traditional sexual ethic
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different.

[Notes]
PIETER

So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changing a person’s attractions.

[Notes]
PIETER

Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
We believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
PIETER

What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to traditional sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a progressive sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction

For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I wants, I started asking God in 2014 what He wants for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So in 2018 some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers
Share
What did you find helpful about this articulation of God’s wisdom? Challenging?
How is this different than ways you’ve shared about God’s wisdom in the past?

[Notes]
PIETER
why?

[Notes]
PIETER

now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence, but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
PIETER

In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singleness where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out
And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question, “What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”
God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
PIETER

But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it
You see, even if I could somehow convince myself theologically that God would bless a same-sex marriage between two Christians
I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my life and the lives of others

Primarily, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobats to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said
So they continue believing that God fully blesses same-sex marriages,
but they just concluded that the Bible is not binding or authoritative for modern people
but once they get to a place where the Bible and the Church can’t tell you who God is
they realize they are just worshipping a God they came up with
and what’s the likelihood that the God of their imagination is real?

and listen, I don’t want that for my gay friends
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God
but the fruit I see of a progressive sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith

I’m convinced both by theology and by experience that a traditional sexual ethic is what’s best for me!
Why do I believe?
Yet, the gay Christians following a historic sexual ethic are still struggling.

Christians MUST do better.

[Notes]
PIETER

But there’s bad fruit of a historic sexual ethic, too
my gay Christian friends who are stewarding their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic are lonely, struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
And this is because the Church is doing a horrible job teaching about sexual stewardship and loving and serving people like me
I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon historic Christian sexual ethics because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic




the problem

[Notes]
AMBER

But here’s the problem
Christians aren’t doing this well
And the damage isn’t limited to LGBT+ people

The problem(s)
God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is for companionship & mutual fulfillment.
I only have to have kids if and when I want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

[Notes]
AMBER

Here’s what Christians really seem to believe today

God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married and have kids. I don’t need to consult God about it.
The purpose of marriage is for companionship and mutual fulfillment.
I only have to have kids if and when I want them.
God calls a select few to lifetime vocational singleness and He sustains them spiritually; they don’t need embodied family because they have a special, deep relationship with Jesus.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can, and friends shouldn’t be too close.
The problem(s)
As a result…
Straight Christians are suffering from higher divorce rates, lower marriage rates, and lonely singleness
Gay Christians are tempted by the double standard into a destructive victim mentality

[Notes]
AMBER

What are the results of having those beliefs?
It's hurting straight people

Straight Christians are casually engaging in romance,
having sex outside of marriage,
suffering from near-ubiquitous pornography addiction,
unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
and engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage (half of Christian marriages end in divorce)

Marriage rates have declined over 60% over the past half-century, but few straight Christians consider Christ’s invitation to vocational singleness,
relegating celibacy to a curse of loneliness for the sake of the gospel.
Straight people who are involuntarily single suffer from the lack of support in their churches.
A 2017 Barna Study found that singles struggle more with depression, anxiety, doubt in God’s existence, and rebounding from that doubt.

Ultimately, our looking the other way when the Bible calls straight people to inconvenient sexual stewardship, our bending the rules for straight people
Doesn’t really help straight people
Rather, it enables their own destruction
In the words of Jesus in Matthew 19, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning.”

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.

This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.

Christian leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.
the solution

[Notes]
AMBER

But there’s a solution
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexual stewardship
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
AMBER

Your community can become a place where gay students thrive according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And in the process bless every Christian in your community

How?

First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.
As we’ve already mentioned, most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support for either
They enable straight Christians to ignore God’s wisdom to their own detriment
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
Your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out the one God calls them to
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people, so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers, and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic, haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late.

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*, demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If kids hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some of them realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting the adults in their lives to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.” Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort
Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics, but the pathways they offer for sexual stewardship aren’t viable.
Those churches are places where few gay people are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many Christians misused mixed-orientation marriage, the pendulum has now swung the opposite direction, and many churches teach that lifetime singleness is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about vocational singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well, and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
Vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out—they’re starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and even providing financial support in the early years.
Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people, cautioning against getting into such a marriage recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.


Share
How might people at your church respond to this nuanced presentation of God’s wisdom for gay people? What would they find compelling? Lacking?

[Notes]
AMBER
tough questionsin discipleship

[Notes]
what are some of those?
and how can you respond?
Pastoral Care Question 1
How do I know what God's wisdom is? Did Jesus even talk about gay people? Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

We discover God’s best for us by reading His Scriptures with the historic Church.

[Notes]
here’s our first tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

How do I know what God's wisdom is?
Did Jesus even talk about gay people?
Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

Here’s how I’d respond:
I believe God made the world perfectly, He gave us choice, and then humans chose to disobey Him. 
Our sin bent everything about the world, yet God looked back at the world, He noticed what would bring us harm,
but he also noticed the ways His best still shined through.

So He revealed to us in His Scripture what would bring us harm and what His best still is for us,
and He gave us the Church to read and interpret the Scriptures with

Whenever a Christian asks a question about morality, the right question to ask isn’t, “What can I get away with?”
Instead, it’s “What is God’s best for me?”
And we answer that question by studying His Scriptures
and discovering whether there’s a historic Christian consensus or a contemporary global Christian consensus on the question 
Pastoral Care Question 1
The whole of Scripture reveals God’s best for everyone’s sexuality: vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

We just need to read the words of Jesus.

[Notes]
But when we ask, “What’s God’s best for gay people?”,
we don’t even need to look at the verses that many believe call same-sex sexuality activity a sin.
They are meaningful evidence, but I don’t think they’re necessary to know God’s wisdom for my sexuality.

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not those few passages, but the whole of Scripture.
Consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives,
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness.
When it comes to what to do with our capacities for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear.
There are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

To arrive at that, we just need to read the words of Jesus…
Pastoral Care Question 1
In Matthew 19, Jesus defines marriage as a lifetime commitment between one woman and one man to serve God.

Then Jesus offers the alternative of lifetime abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

[Notes]
In twelve verses in Matthew 19, Jesus tells us everything we need to know

Jesus calls His people back to God’s original intentions for marriage
A lifelong marriage between one woman and one man to serve God, not themselves

And then Jesus introduces an alternative
Permanently giving up romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention

Those are God’s best for us
Christian marriage or vocational singleness
Regardless of sexual orientation

That’s what a vast majority of Christians have believe over the past 2,000 years
And that’s what the majority of global Christians believe today
Pastoral Care Question 1
Love = Willing the good of the other
Love = Empathy + Wisdom
Empathy – Wisdom ≠ Love
Wisdom – Empathy ≠ Love

[Notes]
Now some would respond, “But a loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage”

The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,”
that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that.

It’s saying that God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest.
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is.

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer.
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers.
How do we know what God wants to offer us? By reading the Scriptures with the historic Church!

But it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things.
We have to help people take hold of them.
We have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive.

So love = empathy + wisdom
empathy without wisdom isn’t love
wisdom without empathy isn’t love

If we want to imitate God and love people,
we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to His wisdom and help them do so
Pastoral Care Question 2
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
SKIP???

here’s a second set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 2
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Now to the second question: Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 2
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 2
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Did God intend for me to be gay? Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.

[Notes]
Did God intend for me to be gay?
Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Well, as I understand it, Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God does not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction
or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.

Yet I experience same-sex attractions,
so clearly God allowed it, even if it wasn’t his intentions for me!
How does that make sense?
We’ll come back to that…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall.

All of us were corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us.

[Notes]
What, then, are same-sex attractions?

Well, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall.

I believe that when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world,
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.

None of us are how God intended.
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin.

So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction.

But because I was born into a broken world,
one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a brokenness and temptation, but it is not a sin.

While we don’t choose who we’re attracted to, we do choose how we steward our desires.

[Notes]
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Yet while we don’t choose who we are attracted to, 
We do choose how we respond.
Every person is responsible for stewarding their sexuality in God-honoring ways, regardless of their sexual orientation.
Share
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

[Notes]
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

Pastoral Care Question 4
Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

God has the power to do miracles, and scientific studies have shown sexual orientation change efforts to be harmfully ineffective.

[Notes]
SKIP???

maybe you’ll be asked this fourth tough question:

Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

Here’s how I’d respond:

I want to be clear: there is no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
There’s no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation.

Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts
experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts).

Pastoral Care Question 4
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when asked, how is that fair?

Why do bad things happen to innocent people?

[Notes]
Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:

If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing,
how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: Why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation.
They’re innocent.
So why?

Pastoral Care Question 4
For our choices to love God and each other to matter, God chooses to allow the consequences of our decisions to play out (including our mistaken decisions).

[Notes]
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
It’s the theological concept of free process.

If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choice?
No

So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something,
God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Same-sex attractions develop because of the sins of others, going all the way back to Adam and Eve.

To protect free will, God allows people to develop same-sex attractions.

[Notes]
How do I think that applies to broken sexuality?

I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others.

Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations, going all the way back to Adam and Even.
Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.
There is no evidence that less-than-ideal parenting or sexual abuse increases a person’s likelihood of developing same-sex attractions.

But then to protect my free will,
God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Yet, God has promised to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good!

[Notes]
Thankfully, God has promised us
(and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good.

It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life.

Pastoral Care Question 5
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our fifth set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
Most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:
At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.

Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshiping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been followed a revisionist sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 5
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 5
Yet, churches have often promoted a double standard of sexual stewardship.

They taught that straight people need romance and can assume marriage, but then taught the opposite for gay people.

[Notes]
Okay, so maybe embodying God’s wisdom in the best ways can actually be good
But historically, has it been fair?

Admittedly, no.

Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Churches lost credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom, and it hurt straight people.

Instead, we can raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship.

[Notes]
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, I think churches ought to invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.

This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance,
having sex outside of marriage, making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography,
failing to consider a call to vocational singleness, unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.

These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God’s inconvenient wisdom
and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.
Pastoral Care Question 6
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
and here’s our last set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 6
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
SKIP

Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
SKIP

Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
SKIP

And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
AS WE’VE ALREADY TALKED ABOUT

Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.

After college, I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
Unfortunately, each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.

Then in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie (my former Anglican priest)
to share that I felt called to vocational singleness but didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
I asked, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus seven of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
Share
In the past, when someone came out to you or to your community, what was the response? Did that response strengthen relationship or leave them more hesitant about Jesus? Why?

[Notes]
so, how can you respond when someone comes out to you?
Well first, I’m curious what your experiences have been with people coming out?
In the past, when someone came out to you or to your community, what was the response?
Did that response strengthen relationship or leave them more hesitant about Jesus? Why?
when someone “comes out”

[Notes]
so, how can you respond when someone comes out to you?
let’s define what it means for someone to come out
When someone “comes out”
Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a revisionist sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex sex.

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.

[Notes]
Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.

But often people coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.
When someone “comes out”
Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. People share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.
When someone “comes out”
Avoid words/phrases like
homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual"
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as micro-aggressions.

When someone “comes out”
Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
God wants us to bring the challenges we face to our brothers and sisters in Christ and into the light.
Hiding often leads to shame and spiritual unhealth

Don't share their story with others without their permission.
“Outing” someone betrays their trust and may cause them to trust Jesus less.

Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
As we’ll explore more soon, people do not choose which attractions they develop
and there’s no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
Suggesting the opposite leads to false hope and loss of faith.

Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation.
As we’ll explore more soon, people develop their sexual orientation through a combination of genetic and childhood environmental factors,
but five-year-old’s noticing rainbow flags in their neighborhood or two people of the same sex holding hands
does not increase their likelihood of developing robust, enduring same-sex attractions.

Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.
While some communities talk about addiction (including alcoholism) in more sensitive ways than past decades,
a comparison to alcoholism, for example, still insinuates that the attractions are the same-sex attracted person’s fault
and that their attractions are a form of addiction (neither of which are true).
When someone “comes out”
Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Front Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try practicing term mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to terminology the person uses (or ask them),
ask them what they mean when they use those words,
and then use those same words with those same definitions as an act of hospitality. 

Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation
is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but is instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language and open the door for future conversation.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”
When someone “comes out”
Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed),
make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When someone “comes out”
Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.
Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When someone “comes out”
What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try these questions:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for *early* conversations.
If you already have a discipleship relationship with the individual,
you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship.
Even then, you need to have built up a meaningful amount of relational equity and trust before you directly address sexual ethics.

When someone “comes out”
Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first.

If they’re a Christian but disagree about sex ethics, remember the sins of past Christians against LGBT+ people.

[Notes]
Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
If they’re not Christians yet, don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned gay people to loneliness if committed to celibacy.
When someone “comes out”
Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Share
What internal hesitation do you feel toward “focusing on salvation” and “redirecting to fundamental faith questions”? Why?

[Notes]
What internal hesitation do you feel toward “focusing on salvation” and “redirecting to fundamental faith questions”? Why?
q&a
