
webinars
equip


We’ll get started at 5 min after!

webinars
equip



[Notes]
Welcome to our Equip Webinar this month
We’re looking forward to getting in a habit of monthly webinars
If you’re curious, our March webinar will be on Discerning between Vocational Singleness and Christian Marriage!
Second, I will send full notes from today’s webinar after we finish, so don’t worry if you miss something but didn’t get a chance to write it down

And finally, I will be recording the webinar to add this content to Equip’s Digital Leaders Course
But I will turn off recording before we get to Q&A at the end

ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Responding to Revisionist Sexual Ethics


[Notes]
Now let’s get into today’s topic:

Christian leaders need to be able to make a winsome, positive case for a historic sexual ethic
but sometimes, you get an email or someone knocks on your door, and the conversation goes something like…
”Yeah, I understand your arguments for a historic sexual ethic, but what about…” and they go on to list one of the convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
for many gay people and straight allies, the arguments for a historic sexual ethic are irrelevant
they’re convinced by the arguments for revisionist sexual ethics
And you need to be prepared to respond well
To offer better arguments

So today I want to explore how you can respond to the 10 most convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
but as you’ll see, better arguments alone wont be enough
Many of you have probably already experience this
So we’ll conclude with exploring how churches can become places where gay people can thrive with reasonable effort according to God’s wisdom


7
TOP 9 ARGUMENTS

Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex
The Bible doesn’t talk about gay people
The Bible was wrong about slavery and women
God makes people gay
Sexual orientation doesn’t change
Lifetime abstinence is unrealistic
Mixed-orientation marriages usually fail
Evangelical sexual ethics causes suicide
Marriage is about commitment and companionship
A loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage

[Notes]
Here are the 10 most convincing arguments we’ll address

Before we get started, I want to recognize the stakes of these conversations


these
conversations
are high stakes


[Notes]
even if we succeed in making more logical arguments
Even if we rationally defeat the arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
We can still lose the debate, by being mean, by being ugly
If we fail to be winsome, and instead we are combative and venomous and seem too eager to destroy arguments we disagree with,
it won’t matter what we say
Because those we hope to convince will stop listening
It wont matter how logical we are
Because those we hope to convince will reject our reasoning because of our pathos

I’ll admit, I have been afraid to cover this topic
I am worried that I wont be winsome enough
I am worried that I will step on a landmine or two
I am worried that my tone or style will undo any progress made by my arguments

And that’s my first encouragement when it comes to responding to a revisionist sexual ethic
If you aren’t afraid to step on landmines, that’s a problem
Because you should be
Sometimes, we are too eager to step into this conversation
Its too easy to talk about these in a way that perpetuates a culture war
So if the opportunity arises to respond to arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic, first pause, and remind yourself it not enough to just be right

Also, a quick note about when conversations are about sexual ethics,
and when they’re really about something else.
If the person you’re talking to doesn’t believe that a God exists,
doesn’t believe that God knows what’s best for them better than they do,
or doesn’t believe that the way we know God’s best is by reading His Scriptures with the historic Church,
then your disagreement isn’t about sexual ethics,
and everything I’m about to share is irrelevant.
If the person you’re in conversation with doesn’t believe one of those three more fundamental claims,
then focus on that instead.
Because your disagreement about sexual ethics is merely a result of a more fundamental disagreement,
that more fundamental disagreement is much more important,
and that more fundamental question is actually less emotionally loaded than LGBT+ topics.

#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…


[Notes]
Our first convincing argument: Jesus never said anything about gay sex or gay marriage
The verses that do talk about it are all within context of incest, rape, sex outside of marriage, adultery
the Bible isn’t clear on this
so we should leave this to people and their God to decide what is sinful
#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

It’s true, Jesus never talked about gay sex.
The “clobber passages” do seem unclear.

But, the “clobber passages” aren’t necessary.
Jesus had a lot to say about sexual stewardship for all.

[Notes]
We can admit that Jesus never spoke directly about gay sex or gay marriage
And we can recognize that the verses that seem to address gay sex, the verses many call the clobber passages, can seem unclear
But as I’ll explain, they also aren’t necessary to know what God’s wisdom is for gay people, because Jesus did actually have a lot to say about our sexual stewardship

To be honest, I’d rather just skip the clobber passages altogether,
but you’ll be called on to respond to common arguments discrediting the clobber passages,
so we’ll cover them briefly, addressing arguments against them and recognizing the lack of clarity




#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

The “clobber” passages - Genesis 19
Revisionist: primarily condemning gang rape or lack of hospitality
Response: gay sex wasn’t the only reason, but it was a prominent feature
Still…

[Notes]
Some argue that Gen 19 is really about condemning gang rape or the lack of hospitality

And, while it’s true that anyone claiming that gay sex was the sole reason for Sodom’s destruction is wrong,
same-sex sexual activity was a prominent feature of the story told, and its reasonable to conclude that it was one of the reasons Sodom was punished for

Still, this passage, in particular, has been used to justify horrific hate crimes against gay people, and referencing it is likely to unconvincing



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

The “clobber” passages – Lev 18 & 20
Revisionist: about maintaining ritual purity or condemning gay cult prostitution + author unaware of committed gay relationships
Response: can’t dismiss plain reading, God not limited by author, contemporaries aware of committed same-sex relationships, about ritual and moral purity

[Notes]
Some argue that Lev 18:22 and 20:13 are about maintaining ritual purity or condemning gay cult prostitution
And they argue that these passages couldn’t possibly be condemning committed, same-sex relationships because those were nonexistent in the Ancient Near East

It’s true, gay cult prostitution was probably the most common form of same-sex sexual relations in the Ancient Near East,

But first, we can’t dismiss a plain reading of the text consistent with centuries of Church teaching

Second, God is not limited by the understanding of the author, even if the author was not aware of committed, same-sex relationships
that does not limit God’s inspiration of Scripture.
Some argue that Scripture can only mean what it reasonably meant to the author when he wrote it.
But the Church has consistently taught that God can and has inspired authors to write texts beyond the author’s understanding.
Indeed, multiple times in the Old and New Testaments, authors spoke to ideas that would not be fully understood until centuries later.

Third, there is actually evidence that the authors of Scripture were aware of committed, same-sex relationships
Multiple scholars have demonstrated that while less common, committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world.
Greek Homosexuality by K. J. Dover
Roman Homosexuality by Craig A. Williams
So the claim that the authors of Scripture had no awareness of something akin to modern gay relationships is false.

And fourth, when it comes to the argument that these passages are just about maintaining ritual purity, not moral purity,
if that were the case, we’d expect New Testament authors to be silent about gay sex or even declaring Christian freedom from ritual law to engage in gay sex
But instead we see the opposite in Romans and 1 Cor and 1 Tim, leading us to believe that these prohibitions were about both ritual purity and moral purity



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

The “clobber” passages – Romans 1
Revisionist: condemning same-sex idol worship or sexual excess or breaking gender norms
Response: prohibits female same-sex sexual activity, so not about idol worship or gender norms + identifies attractions as broken

[Notes]
Some argue that Rom 1: 18-32 is condemning straight people participating in same-sex rites in honor of idols or sexual excess
Or, because of their views about gender, some argue Rom 1 is prohibiting men from bringing shame upon themselves by playing the receiving role in sex
And perhaps Paul is luring his audience to judge others, only to turn on them and point out that they are no better themselves, as some suggest

But that doesn’t cancel out the fact that Romans 1 goes further than passages we’ve covered so far
Previous passages only referred to male same-sex sexual activity.
Without this passage, one could argue that the Bible merely forbids the sexual practices of some men
But the reference in this passage to female same-sex sexual activity broadens the reference beyond just cult prostitution or pederasty,
as those weren’t commonly practiced between two women.

And we can dismiss the argument that the Bible is just prohibiting men from playing the receiving role in sex,
because that consideration is irrelevant for female same-sex sexual activity that is still prohibited here

Plus, this passage goes further by not only addressing same-sex sexual activity, but addressing desires for same-sex sexual activity
Called those unnatural and broken


#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

The “clobber” passages – 1 Cor 6, 1 Tim 1
Revisionist: condemning breaking gender norms or pederasty + author unaware of committed gay relationships
Response: prohibits penetrating and receiving roles in gay sex + Paul likely aware of committed gay relationships

[Notes]
Some people argue that 1 Cor 6:9-10 and 1 Tim 1:8-10 prohibit men playing the receiving role in sex or pederasty,
a romantic relationship between an older male mentor and a teenage male mentee
And again, some will argue that committed, same-sex relationships were nonexistent,
so Paul couldn’t possibly have intended these prohibitions to be against committed same-sex relationships

yes, it’s true, malakoi​ could refer to pederasty or playing the receiving role in gay sex,
and arsenokoitai​ seems to be a new word Paul has coined and there isn’t unanimous agreement about the best translation

But the strong consensus of scholars is that the most reasonable translation for arsenokoitai​ is “men who have sex with men”,
or more narrowly men playing the penetrative role in same-sex sexual activity
So Paul goes out of his way by using the word ​malakoi​ and ​arsenokoitai​ in 1 Corinthians 6 and 1 Timothy 1
to condemn both the penetrative and receiving partner in gay sex.

Plus, as we’ve already noted, multiple scholars have demonstrated that committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world
Paul would have been familiar with contemporaries who wrote about such relationships

#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

The “clobber” passages condemn playing the passive role in male gay sex, condemn playing the active role in male gay sex, condemn female gay sex, and identify same-sex sexual desires as broken.

Still, it’s true that Jesus didn’t speak directly about gay sex. But…

[Notes]
So you see, while we can poke holes in each of these passages,
all together, these six passages do 4 different things
condemn playing the passive role in male gay sex,
condemn playing the active role in male gay sex, 
condemn female gay sex, and 
identify same-sex sexual desires as broken.
The verses seem to address every possible iteration of same-sex sexual activity and beyond to ensure that the reader is not mistaken.

But its still true that none of these passages refer specifically to a committed same-sex couple
And Jesus doesn’t say anything directly about gay sex or gay marriage
It’d be a lot simpler if in one of the Gospels, Jesus walked up to two faithful Jews of the same-sex
who had somehow gotten married, had been faithful to each other for decades, were raising children together in the faith
and could clarify whether that was God’s best for those two believers or not

But we don’t need the clobber passages to know God’s wisdom for gay people
And we don’t need to hear Jesus address gay sex directly to know how Jesus thinks Christians should steward their sexualities

#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

Jesus in Matthew 19
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman
Vocational singleness is the only alternative to Christian marriage

[Notes]
in a single set of thirteen verses at the beginning of Matthew 19, Jesus lays out the two best paths for Christians,
speaks to the sexual difference in Christian marriage,
and highlights the importance of vocational singleness as the alternative to Christian marriage.

Jesus defines Christian marriage as being a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman,
and he urges everyone to consider vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom as the alternative,
recognizing that for some it would be voluntary but for others it would be involuntary.

Furthermore, Paul goes on to confirm these teachings in Ephesians 5 and 1 Corinthians 7



#1 Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex…

Jesus was clear about God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people.

[Notes]
God has made clear to us through the Bible what Christian marriage is
and that vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom is the best alternative
These are God’s best for His people

So no, Jesus didn’t technically condemn homosexuality
But Jesus and the Bible are clear about God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship for all people
And both gay sex and gay marriage are incompatible with that best



#2 The Bible doesn’t talk about gay people as we know today…


[Notes]
Our second convincing argument: homosexual orientation/identity didn't exist in Bible times,
therefore the Bible wasn’t talking about gay people or same-sex marriage as we think of it today,
therefore any prohibitions are irrelevant
#2 The Bible doesn’t talk about gay people as we know today…

It’s true, gay people as a cultural group is man-made 

But 	– there have always been gay people
	– committed gay relationships existed
	– Bible addresses activity, not identity
	– God is not limited by the author

[Notes]
Yes, the idea that “gay” people are a distinct cultural group or a distinct sexuality is something created by man—just like race—to oppress people.
That idea is a recent development. 

But there have always been people who experienced same-sex attraction
There have always been people who exclusively preferred sexual relations with people of the same sex
Any claims that this kind of people didn’t exist in the Ancient Near East are unfounded.

Plus, as we’ve already mentioned, while less common, committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world.

Regardless, each of the verses we referenced earlier focus on same-sex sexual activity, regardless of the cultural identity of the individual
God is clear through Scripture that same-sex sexual activity is a sin
No one is claiming that the Bible is addressing gay people as a cultural group
The Bible is addressing same-sex sexual activity, regardless of whether the people engaging are gay, straight, bisexual, pansexual, etc.

And as we’ve already addressed, even if the authors of Scripture weren’t aware of sexual orientation or sexual identity,
that does not limit God’s inspiration of Scripture.

So in summary, while its true that sexual orientation and identity didn’t exist, as we know it, in the minds of the authors of Scripture,
there have always been gay people,
committed same-sex relationships were present and documented in the Ancient Greco-Roman world,
and God is not limited by the authors of scripture
Plus, we can’t dismiss the prohibitions in Scripture because they address sexual activity, not orientation or identity
#3 The Bible and Christians were wrong about slavery and women…


[Notes]
Our third convincing argument: Many argue that the Bible and Christians were wrong about slavery and gender equality,
and in the same way the Bible and Christians are wrong about gay marriage
#3 The Bible/Christians werewrong about slavery and women…

It’s true, Christians have used the Bible to justify slavery and oppress women. And God sometimes calls his people to something proximate, not ultimate.

But, while there’s a trajectory in Scripture toward modern views on slavery and women, there’s no trajectory in Scripture about gay sex.
Slaves, Women & Homosexuals by William Webb

[Notes]
It’s true, Christians have used the Bible to justify slavery and oppress women
These past couple years white Christians have taken a more honest look at the white church’s complicity in American slavery and racism than ever before,
and the legacy of the church is shameful

I’m not going to try to defend Christians or appeal to the credibility of Christians at large as evidence for who is right about gay marriage

But I do think it matters what the Bible says and doesn’t say
And when we take a closer look at how the Bible talks about slavery, gender, and sexuality across the Biblical narrative,
we see that these are treated differently

In William Webb’s book “Slaves, Women & Homosexuals” he explains that
The people and place and time that the authors of the Bible spoke into could not have accepted modern ways Christians think about slavery and gender equality
But God is an accommodating God—instead of calling people to perfection he sometimes calls them to something more good
that is in reach or within the bounds of their understanding
We do see the way God talks about these things in the Bible change over time—they suggest a trajectory toward the ultimate good

The Old Testament seems to allow, if not encourage, the people of Israel to practice slavery, as long as they aren’t enslaving Israelites
In contrast, Jesus heals slaves and Paul goes as far as to urge Philemon to see his slave as a beloved brother in Christ, not as a slave
The Old Testament seems to treat women as a kind of property,
where as in the New Testament, many women among the followers of Jesus and in positions of leadership in the early church
Ultimately, the Bible points toward what we believe about slavery and gender equality today

However, that same trajectory is not found in how the Bible talks about same-sex sexual activity
It consistently condemns it
God doesn’t seem to be accommodating here, there isn’t a trajectory toward a different, better good
It is a flat line pointing toward the same conclusion throughout time for all people

So in summary, yes, Christians were wrong about slavery and gender equality
And Christians have done a poor job of loving gay people
And perhaps there’s even a shift across the Biblical narrative in what authors call us to
But the Bible does not treat gay sex the same ways as slavery and gender. It does not accommodate across the Biblical narrative. It does not soften or moderate. It is consistent.
#4 People don’t choose to be gay, therefore God makes people gay…


[Notes]
Our fourth convincing argument: we now know that same-sex attraction isn’t a choice
Therefore, God must have made people gay
and God must bless monogamous relationships with people God made a person to desire
#4 People don’t choose to be gay, therefore God makes people gay…

It’s true, people don’t choose to be gay.

But, science can’t tell us God’s intentions. None of us are how God made us to be.
Romans 1 clarifies that same-sex attractions are broken, not intended.

[Notes]
the consensus among scientists is that both genetic factors and environmental factors contribute to the development of SSA
people neither choose to be gay nor are they born determined to be gay

So it’s true, people don’t choose to be gay
But God didn’t intend for any of us to be gay either

Even queer secular scientists recognize that no one is born gay.
We all develop our sexual orientations from a mix of genetics and relational upbringing.
But even if we were born gay, that doesn't tell us about God's intentions.

None of us are how God intended. All of us were corrupted at a genetic level, formed imperfectly in our mother's womb,
and were born into a fallen world that injured us countless times before we developed true agency.

God's intentions aren't a scientific question.
They're a theological question.
So what does the Bible say?

As we’ve already explored, Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are "unnatural";
they are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.

God did’t intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.
Yet, some of us have clearly developed same-sex attractions,
so at the very least, God allowed this brokenness to develop.

But if same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing,
how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question:
Why do bad things happen to seemingly innocent people?

People don’t choose their sexual orientation,
and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation—they’re innocent in that way.
So why?

Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God usually lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
That’s the theological concept of free process.

If God stepped in every time and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choices?
No.

So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something,
God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.

How does that apply to broken sexuality?

I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the decisions of others.
Some see broken genetics as a manifestation of generational sin going all the way back to Adam and Even.
Maybe there was some kind of brokenness in the home and community I grew up in that contributed.
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.

But then to protect my free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions
by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.

Thankfully, as Romans 8:28 promises, God has been faithful to redeem my enduring brokenness for His glory and my good.
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my sexuality
that I’ve experienced the most purpose and belonging in my life.

So in summary, the problem with this revisionist sexual ethics argument is the assumption if people don’t choose to be gay, that must mean God makes people gay
Instead we’ve demonstrated here that none of us are how God made us to be, so how we are today doesn’t tell us anything about God’s intentions
And as we investigate Scripture further, we realize same-sex attractions are broken and God didn’t not intend that for any of us
#5 Sexual orientation doesn’t change, so God must bless gay marriage…


[Notes]
Our fifth convincing argument: reparative therapy doesn’t work and people’s sexual orientation doesn’t change
So God must be okay with gay marriage
Because if sexual orientation can’t change but God still doesn’t bless gay marriage, that’s just not fair
#5 Sexual orientation doesn’t change, so God must bless gay marriage…

It’s true, there’s no formula for changing sexual orientation.

But, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay
and still warns us from engaging in same-sex sexual activity.

[Notes]
Scripture does not promise permanent relief from any temptation in this lifetime
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions:
no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do miracles,
And sometimes he does!

but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Why won’t God change my sexual orientation if it is broken?
You know, I don’t know
But I do know that gay people are not alone in this experience
There are a lot of people in this world asking why God won’t answer their prayers for healing

Still, God did not intend for us to be gay and God has warned us from engaging in same-sex sexual activity
#6 Celibacy shouldn’t be forced and doesn’t work for many people…


[Notes]
Our sixth convincing argument: no one should be forced into celibacy,
and celibacy doesn’t work for many people
#6 Celibacy shouldn’t be forced and doesn’t work for many people…

It’s true, long-term abstinent singleness hasn’t work out well for gay people.

But, God calls all Christians to abstinent singleness outside of opposite-sex Christian marriage.
Vocational singleness isn’t working because straight people aren’t doing it and churches aren’t supporting it.

[Notes]
Revisionist sexual ethic advocates are right to point out that longterm abstinent singleness hasn’t worked out well for a lot of gay people
But that’s not because Christians have somehow forced gay people into abstinence against God’s will

if you’re a Christian, you are born into, forced into a temporary state of abstinent singleness
We can choose to honor God or not, but the state is automatic.
Scripture is clear that for the Christian, the only God-honoring alternative to opposite-sex Christian marriage is abstaining from sex
Even Jesus, in Matthew 19 verse 12, recognizes that some will be celibate for a lifetime, even thought that’s not their preference

Why, if God actually means for us to be so-called “forced” into abstinence, is this feeling of being forced so distasteful?
Because very few Christians really think vocational singleness is good, despite what Jesus and Paul had to say about it
Because our whole life, we’ve heard straight people teaching other straight people that they only have to be abstinent longterm if they want to be
We’ve heard straight people teach other straight people that romance and marriage are the most beautiful things God created
And then they pity people who are single but dont want to are to be.
Pitying never-married women, widows, divorcees, etc.
But then they turn to gay people and tell us that being forced into celibacy is good for us
Of course gay people are going to reject that

Which brings me to the last part
If God means for many of us to be abstinent longterm, but its not working, why?
Well its not because gay people aren’t trying hard enough. We have. We are.

And its not because vocational singleness is somehow less natural than marriage
The reality is, in light of the fall, what comes naturally to us is sex and polyamory
Neither faithful monogamy nor abstinence come naturally to us
Everyone has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for marriage and vocational singleness
And all of us need the gift of either vocational singleness or Christian marriage from God to do it well

So, gay people aren’t finding vocational singleness challenging because its somehow less natural than marriage
Gay people are struggling because because straight people aren’t doing vocational singleness
and our churches aren’t supporting it
#6 Celibacy shouldn’t be forced and doesn’t work for many people…

But, churches lead straight Christians to assume romance and marriage, few straight Christians walk out vocational singleness, gay Christians are often the only Christians following the singleness of Jesus and Paul.

Churches don’t teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness, procreation, or divorce + celibates can’t find intimacy and permanent family.

[Notes]
Many of our churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness
As a result, few straight people are seriously considering a life without romance for the sake of the kingdom

gay Christians are often the only people who consider vocational singleness.
Because their circumstances force them to.
And then they are often the only Christians actually committing to singleness for the sake of the kingdom in the ways Jesus and Paul describe.
But because there are so few gay celibate Christians, the Church doesn’t have to move a finger to support them.
churches can ignore them and neglect to meaningfully invest in the support of celibate people.
Christians leaders can procrastinate offering family in the body of Christ to widows, divorcees, single parents,
and single people who want to marry by simply offering marriage as the solution.
Pastors and lay leaders can say, “If you’re lonely, go get married.”
At some level, this message translates to, “We are too busy to be family for you. Get married like everyone else so we don’t have to bother.”
That’s why gay celibate Christians are struggling

And that is why better arguments aren’t enough
Because if you’re being honest, you’ve got to admit that churches haven’t been teaching what the bible has to say about vocational singleness
Churches haven’t really been inviting straight people to consider the singleness of Jesus or Paul
Churches haven’t been teaching about the dangers of casual Christian dating or the pornography epidemic
Churches haven’t been teaching about what the bible has to say about unbiblical divorce/remarriage
Churches haven’t been teaching about what the bible has to say about Christian marriages being open to raising children for the sake of the kingdom
Our churches aren’t actually places where those walking out vocational singleness could find the same depth and permanence of family as marriage people
And as a result gay people are often the only people walking out vocational singleness and they’re struggling with loneliness, doubt, depression, and suicidality

So telling gay people what the Bible says isn’t enough
You must do what it takes to become churches where gay people could actually thrive in vocational singleness with reasonable effort

You want to know what’s the single best thing straight Christians could do to care for the gay people in their lives?
And to make vocational singleness live-able for gay and straight Christians?
Give Jesus a chance to call you to vocational singleness.
Or if you’re already married, teach the kids you disciple (whether your own or someone else’s) to ask Jesus
whether he wants to give them the gift of vocational singleness or Christian marriage

You see, churches will only start providing practical support for those called to singleness for the Lord
when there are enough people doing vocational singleness to force churches to recognize
that God calls a meaningful minority of Christians to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
if 10% of straight Christians accepted their call to vocational singleness,
churches would finally accept the responsibility to be family for the vocationally single
then the church would finally be a place where gay celibate Christians can thrive

In summary, God is actually calling every Christian to abstinence unless they are in an opposite-sex Christian marriage, regardless of our preference
But yes, celibacy isn’t working for a lot of people
But that’s not because God doesn’t mean for us to be abstinent
It’s because the Church is doing a poor job of supporting vocational singleness


#7 Mixed-orientation marriages (MOMs) don’t end well and should be avoided…


[Notes]
Our seventh convincing argument: The stories of MOMs imploding is proof that MOMs should never be an option
#7 Mixed-orientation marriages (MOMs) don’t end well and should be avoided…

It’s true, some MOMs ended disastrously because of secrecy.

But, MOMs can be healthy with transparency. We should not dismiss the possibility for those called to a MOM.

[Notes]
What is a MOM?  Mixed-orientation marriages are opposite-sex marriages where at least one spouse experiences same-sex attraction.

It’s true, many of us have seen the implosion of a MOM that ended in a divorce and hurt everyone involved. 
For decades, pastors and parents told gay people to marry someone of the opposite sex and keep their desires a secret,
hoping it would cure their gayness.
But that secrecy was the seed of destruction. 

In response to all of the bad fruit resulting from pushing MOMs, the pendulum has swung to the other extreme.
From the late 2000s to now, many pastors have encouraged all gay people to remain celibate.
They’ve discouraged any gay person from considering a MOM,
claiming that they never work and are always unfair to the straight spouse.
We should be cautious,
but if two people feel called to such a marriage, it can be done well.
We shouldn’t pressure people into either vocational singleness or a MOM.
We also shouldn’t discredit MOMs.
We typically only hear about the ones that fail,
but there are gay people living in beautiful opposite-sex marriages that display the gospel, raising children, and serving in our churches.

Here’s how it can be done well:

First, the gay person needs to share about their sexuality early in the dating process
Recognize that same-sex attraction will likely always be present for the gay person.
You cannot promise someone else that your SSA won’t return.
You must give the other person this information when deciding whether to continue the relationship.
Second, continue to talk about it in marriage.
As with any marriage, communication lines must remain open between spouses.
Spouses need to steward this part of their marriage together.
Third, talk about it with other couples, both MOMs and straight.
Couples in MOMs need other couples in MOMs to talk to
– those who “get it” without having to explain everything.
But they also need straight couples to talk to
It’s easy for a couple in a MOM that doesn’t talk with other couples to blame their marital issues on the sexuality of the gay spouse.
But if couples in a MOM share about their challenges with straight couples,
they quickly realize that their marital issues are universal challenge that all marriages have to deal with,
but they have to share with straight couples to know this!

A key lever for preventing MOMs entered into for the wrong reasons and preventing painful implosions
is by making sure vocational singleness must actually be a viable choice.
Among the MOMs that I know that have ended, most of the time the gay person got into the marriage because they believed it was there only option.
So they never really chose the burden and the beauty of marriage.
Unsurprisingly, this did not end well.
Right theology and viable practice of vocational singleness will lead to healthier motivations for entering into MOMs.
If vocational singleness isn’t an option, marriage isn’t either – it becomes a forced choice.
Both MUST be done well for each to be viable.

So in summary, yes, there has been bad fruit of pushing people into MOMs decades ago,
but we should not dismiss this possibility for those called to it and who walk this path with transparency
#8 Evangelical sexual ethics causes suicide…


[Notes]
Our eight convincing argument: we see the bad fruit of evangelical sexual ethics over recent decades
Therefore the theology must be wrong
#8 Evangelical sexual ethics causes suicide…

It’s true, churches in the 80s, 90s, and 00s mixed historic sex ethics with pray-the-gay-away theology, leading to lose of faith and life.

But, there’s just as bad (if not worse) fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic. It’s churches’ responsibility to become places where gay Christians can thrive with reasonable effort according to God’s wisdom.

[Notes]
Unfortunately, in the 80s, 90s, and 2000s, too many evangelical churches mixed historic sexual ethics with pray-the-gay-away theology
Leading millions to lose their faith or their lives
scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%)
And other studies have found that 54% of gay people who grew up in churches have left the faith

But revisionist sexual ethics also leads to bad fruit
In particular, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a revisionist sexual ethic have stopped believing in God.

at first, they did a little bit of theological acrobats to say that maybe Scripture could be read to support same-sex marriages
but after awhile they admitted that the Bible probably says what we’ve thought it has said
Yet they felt in their bones that the real God fully blesses same-sex marriages,
so they just concluded that the Bible just isn’t binding or authoritative for modern people
but once they got to a place where the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with
and what was the likelihood that the God of their imagination was even real?

To be clear, This has not been true for everyone,
but it has been true of most people I know
And I wish it wasn’t a slippery slope
I wish I saw gay Christians following a revisionist sexual ethic, holding on to their faith, and thriving in their relationships with God
but that’s consistently not been my experience
and every time I share about my consistent experience, over and over again, other gay and straight people say ”I’ve seen that too, and it makes me cry”

So, the fruit I’ve seen of a revisionist sexual ethic in the lives of my gay friends has been losing their faith.
That is a death of another kind.

Many gay Christians trying to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic feel lost in between these two extremes
Pray-the-gay-away theology on one side, revisionist sexual ethics on the other, both leading to death
While trying to avoid the pitfalls of either extreme, they still struggle with loneliness and sin,
Affecting their relationships with God and the Kingdom work they could do.
Bot because they aren’t trying hard enough
Or because a historic sexual ethic is false
But because our churches continue to do a poor job of embodying God’s wisdom
Churches that have abandoned pray-the-gay-away theology but still resist revisionist sexual ethics often feel aimless
Unsure of what the alternative looks like

I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

Thankfully, there’s a third option
That few churches have tried
But has been shown to preserve faith and promote mental health

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay Christians trying to follow a compassionate embodiment of historic sexual ethics
scored in the normal range for mental health compared to the average American.
Furthermore, research found that gay celibate Christians scored higher than average on overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate embodiment of historic sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health,
unlike theological extremes on the left and right.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or God's compassion,
But also recognize that pointing out the bad fruit of revisionist sexual ethics isn’t enough
If order for God’s wisdom to be convincing, we’re going to have to take practical steps to embody a historic sexual ethic
In ways that transforms our churches into places where gay Christians could actually thrive with reasonable effort according to God’s wisdom

What does that look like?
We’ll get to that in a second

But in summary, yes, there’s bad fruit of evangelical sexual ethics over recent decades
but there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic
Instead, we need to embody historic sexual ethics in compassionate ways, and there’s work to done there
#9 Marriage is about commitment and companionship…


[Notes]
our ninth convincing argument: marriage is just about commitment and companionship
So as long as same-sex marriage meet that standard, certainly God would fully bless them
#9 Marriage is about commitment and companionship…

It’s true, straight Christians have often taught that marriage is about commitment and companionship.

But, the Bible + Church have consistently taught that Christian marriage (joined, sustained by God) is a lifetime union between a man and woman to raise children and embody the gospel.

[Notes]
It’s true, many straight Christians seem to believe and teach that marriage is merely about companionship and commitment
That it’s primarily about two people loving each other and serving God together
(until that commitment is inconvenient)
And they seem to believe and teach that God wants marital love for everyone
And if that were what Christian marriage was fundamentally about,
then it would be reasonable to assume that God would fully bless same-sex unions that meet those standards 

But, those straight Christians are mistaken about what Christian marriage is
In a way that has hurt gay and straight Christians

Instead, the Bible teaches and a majority of global Christians today believe that Christian marriage
—joined, blessed, and sustained by God—is a lifetime vocation between a man and a women to raise children,
enjoy intimacy with each other, and embody the relationship in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church in specific ways
(particularly the complementarity—both in mind and body—of the sexes joined in sex for the purposes of having and/or raising children).

So why haven’t straight Christians been teaching that?
Because they’d have to recognize how few straight marriages fulfill God’s purposes for Christian marriage

If churches offered a biblical, orthodox teaching about Christian marriage,
it’d be pretty clear why same-sex couples don’t fulfill God’s purposes for Christian marriage

But then they’d also have to recognize that many opposite-sex marriages also fall short of God’s design for Christian marriage
That God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the marriage of your opposite-sex non-Christian neighbors.

That God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the opposite-sex Christian marriage using their vows
as a permission slip for sex while blocking the possibility of children without asking God.

That God doesn’t provide His fullest blessing to the opposite-sex marriage of Christians
who were previously in different Christian marriages that ended without biblical grounds for divorce.

But straight Christians don’t want to be honest about how jealous God is about Christian marriage and what He blesses.
Instead, leaders have been willing to speak the truth when it offends gay people on the streets
but not when it offends straight people in our churches.
And this inconsistently has lost those Christian leaders any credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom

Here’s the double whammy—it hasn’t actually benefitted straight people either
Marriage rates for straight Christians are plummeting
Loneliness is growing
And straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages, deeply wounding both spouses and their kids

So the solution to inconsistent standards between sexual ethics for straight Christians versus gay Christians isn’t to lower the bar for gay Christians
Because low standards for straight Christians have hurt them deeply in the long run
No, the solution is to call straight Christians back to historic sexual ethics
And then invest in the support gay and straight Christians in our churches will need to truly steward their sexualities according to God’s wisdom

Curiously, straight Christians have often tried to avoid the lifetime and life-raising nature of Christian marriage
Ignoring the call to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
And twisting Scripture to justify wider grounds for divorce and remarriage
(on thinner justification than gay people have tried to use to justify Christian marriage)
I say curious, because studies have found that Christian marriages that practice natural family planning
A practice involving an intentional choice not to use contraception and to be open to raising children for the kingdom
Christian marriages practices NFP are 70% less likely to get divorced than the average Christian marriage
To be clear, I’m not categorically against all contraception
But this speaks powerfully to the effects of ignoring God’s wisdom
And the positive power of abiding in God’s wisdom

So in summary, Christian marriage is about much more than commitment and companionship
And compromising on God’s wisdom for straight sexual stewardship has had painful consequences
The solution is to raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship, calling everyone to historic sexual ethics







#10 A loving God wouldn’tdeny me a loving marriage…


[Notes]
and finally, our tenth convincing argument: God is love
Marriage is about love
So God wouldn’t deny me marriage
#10 A loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage…

It’s true, God is the author of love, but that means that to know what love really is, we but search for what God says love is.

Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things God has to offer and helping them take hold of that.

[Notes]
Still, some would say, “I don’t care what the Bible says, God is love, so God must be for love, whatever form it takes.”
The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,” that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that
It’s saying that the God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers
how do we know what God wants to offer us? The consistent teachings of the Bible and the Church
Let’s call that Christian orthodoxy

but it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things
we have to help people take hold of them
we have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive
So love = empathy + orthodoxy
empathy without orthodoxy isn’t love
orthodoxy without empathy isn’t love
If we want to imitate God and love people, we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to Christian orthodoxy and help them do so

So in summary, love is more than just giving people what they want
God is clear in Scripture His best for us
And if we truly love people, we will help them take hold of those best things







Christian communities must become places of thriving


[Notes]
So we’ve covered the 10 most convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
I’ve modeled responding winsomely
And, we’ve pointed out that better arguments alone aren’t enough
I’ve pointed out that churches must do what it takes to help gay Christians stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic actually thrive
Our Christian communities have got to become places where, with reasonable effort, gay Christians bear good fruit from a traditional sexual ethic


38
THRIVING COMMUNITIES
Share publicly and clearly about God’s love and wisdom for gay people
Christian leaders minister to gay people with compassion and theological accuracy
Protect kids from the wounds of the closet by sharing God’s love and wisdom before puberty
Help everyone thrive according to God’s good and weighty wisdom
Offer lifelong, lived-in family to those called to vocational singleness

[Notes]
How?

First, many churches are already striving to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people in honest and empathetic ways.
With compassion and theological accuracy, they’re exploring the complex questions about faith and LGBT+ topics,
like whether God intended for people to experience same-sex attraction,
how God could be good if He usually chooses not to change people’s sexual orientations,
how God invites gay Christians to steward their sexualities,
how God invites gay people to meet their needs for connection and community in healthy ways,
and how friends and family can come around gay people in their lives.
As a result, straight people in these churches are learning how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in these churches who haven’t shared their story yet know what their churches believe and whether it’s safe to share their story.

Second, many churches are equipping pastors and lay leaders to offer compassionate and theologically accurate one-on-one care to gay people.
They’re doing what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches are recognizing that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors are learning to help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

That’s a great start

But gay Christians committed to a historic sexual ethic are still struggling in most of those churches.
Why?
Their churches are missing three key levers
They’re failing to protect kids from the wounds of the closet
They’re hesitating to raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship
And they’re struggling to offer lifelong, lived-in family to those in vocational singleness

So to become communities of thriving for gay people, they’ve got to protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Second key lever: to become communities of thriving for gay people, churches must raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship
As we’ve already mentioned, Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.
But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.
Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, churches can invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.
This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance, having sex outside of marriage,
making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography, failing to consider a call to vocational singleness,
unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage, or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.
But again, not to make life more difficult for straight people, but to help everyone flourish according to God’s wisdom
and experience less internal resistance and external barriers to thriving because we’re all doing it together

And the third and final key lever: to become communities of thriving for gay people, churches must offer lifelong, lived-in family to those in vocational singleness
Few churches are places where anyone can thrive in lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom, regardless of sexual orientation.
Christian leaders don’t teach vocational singleness, teens don’t see vocational singleness modeled or celebrated,
and vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.

Instead, our churches can teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness,
guide teens and young adults to discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage,
hire vocationally single leaders and pastors,
and celebrate the callings of those called to vocational singleness.
Moreover, churches can ensure that vocational singles enjoy lifelong, lived-in family in the body of Christ
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.

In short, while the best arguments for revisionist sexual ethics aren’t convincing,
While they’re easy to dismiss,
If you want gay people to actually embrace God’s wisdom and thrive according to that wisdom,
with reasonable effort,
Then your churches are going to have to take these five steps to become communities of thriving!

Thank you so much for your time!
We’re now going to move to Q&A
But before we do that, let me turn off the recording…










QUESTIONS?

