


THRIVING IN



CELIBACY & MARRIAGE


[Notes]
How can our churches become places where gay people could thrive in either celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort?
I want to point out a couple of things about that question
“churches” – responsibility for doing this well lies in the hands of churches
“become” – we need to become places where this is true, because most of our churches are not yet places where this is true
“gay people” – that’s the focus of this conference and this workshop, but as you’ll see, our recommendations are universal
“thrive” – we need to aim for more than just survive. God didn’t make us for that. Our goal should be thriving
“either celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage” – we believe that these are the best paths God offers to gay people
“with reasonable effort” – do you really expect anyone to say yes to something that is impossible with reasonable effort? If not, is it really loving to offer something that you don’t expect anyone to take hold of?
So our question for today is: How can our churches become places where gay people could thrive in either celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort?



Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
But before we jump into that, I want to share with you a little about me
My name is Pieter Valk
I studied at Vanderbilt University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Lipscomb University
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling and one day a week I meet with LGBT+ undergraduate students at a Christian university navigating questions of faith, sexuality, and identity

And the rest of the week, I’m the Executive Director of EQUIP
A team of missionary consultants who partner with churches to help them become places where LGBT+ people can belong and thrive according to an orthodox Christian sexual ethic 

how do we know when a church is doing this well? the Gay Teen Test



Gay Teen Test



Does your church…
Invite everyone to think theologically about sexual stewardship?
Talk publicly about their beliefs?
Ensure gay teens share early?
Provide effective one-on-one pastoral care?
Support thriving in celibacy and mixed-orientation marriages?





[Notes]
Our Gay Teen Test asks whether what gay teens in your church hear and see sets them up to fail or flourish. Does a mix of silence and hypocrisy in your church lead teens to reject a traditional sexual ethic and, often, God altogether because of their confusion, shame, fear, loneliness, and hopelessness? Or does your church courageously lead compassionate conversations about God’s love and plan for all people, setting up gay teens to embrace the beauty and the burden of the gospel? We focus on gay teens because if your church is a place where the young gay people already in your church are thriving, that’s a place where other gay people can find thriving as well.
There’s five parts to the Gay Teen Test
the first question on the Gay Teen Test: Is your church a place where everyone, gay or straight, is invited to think theologically about their sexual stewardship and live into God’s wisdom? This includes whether your church invites all people, gay or straight, to ask God whether He is calling them to celibacy or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. And this includes taking what the Bible has to say about divorce and remarriage seriously.

question 2 on the Gay Teen Test: Does your church talk publicly about their beliefs about marriage, sexual orientation development and change, how gay people can meet their intimacy needs, and what good things God has to offer LGBT+ people? Does your church do this in a way that prepares straight people to have careful conversation and prevents gay people from having bait-and-switch experiences?

the third question on the Gay Teen Test: Does your church ensure that before teens realize they are gay, they’ve already heard their parents and pastors talk about God’s love for LGBT+ people and how He invites them to steward their sexualities? Does your church do this so that those gay teens share with parents and pastors soon after realizing their sexuality, all to prevent gay teen suicide, prevent gay teens leaving the faith, and ensure gay teens thrive according to an orthodox Christian sexual ethic?

question 4 on the Gay Teen Test: Are pastors and lay leaders in your church equipped to provide effective one-on-one pastoral care instead of shipping gay people offer to therapists or parachurch ministries?

and last but not least, the fifth question on the Gay Teen Test: Is your church a place where gay people would thrive in celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort? Can those called to celibacy find committed family with other celibate and married people? Can those in mixed-orientation marriages find meaningful support?

we help churches get to a place where they score a 5 out of 5 on the Gay Teen Test

In 5 years, we’ve trained more than 2,000 Christian leaders at 30 churches, campus ministries, and Christian universities

Finally, this work matters to me because I’m a Christian, I am gay, and God calls me to steward that according to an orthodox Christian sexual ethic
I need my church to score a 5 our of 5 on the Gay Teen Test
And I need the churches of the gay people I love to score a 5 our of 5 on the Gay Teen Test

Today, we’ve focusing on number 5





WHY?


[Notes]
why is it so important that our churches be places where gay people can thrive in celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort?



Why?



The loneliness Side B gay Christians experience is the greatest enemy to their thriving…

…and doing celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage well is the solution

[Notes]
Because the loneliness Side B gay Christians experience is the greatest enemy to their thriving
And doing celibacy or a mixed-orientation marriage well is the solution to that loneliness

The loneliness of Side B gay Christians is greater than their shame from homophobia or experiences of poor pastoral care
the greatest enemy of thriving isn’t homophobia or pastors who don’t know how to do discipleship
its loneliness
why are gay people seemingly more lonely?



Gays more lonely?



Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers

54% of LGBT+ people who grew up in the Church have left

[Notes]
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers
54% of LGBT+ people who grew up in the Church have left
These are pretty compelling evidence that the average gay Christian is more lonely than the average straight Christian
why?
do gay people have greater needs? no
is it because gay people are uniquely called to celibacy and celibacy is inherently more lonely? no
is it because we need romantic or sexual connection to be whole? no



More lonely because…



Gay people have greater needs? No

Gay people are uniquely called to celibacy and celibacy is inherently more lonely? No

Everyone needs romantic or sexual connection to be whole? No

[Notes]
Are they more lonely because…
gay people have greater needs? no
gay people are uniquely called to celibacy and celibacy is inherently more lonely? no
everyone needs romantic or sexual connection to be whole? no



Sources of loneliness



This world is broken and separates us from each other and God

Gay people do celibacy and mixed-orientation marriages poorly


[Notes]
some of it is because this world is broken and we will always feel some loneliness
but the average gay Christian experiences much more loneliness than the has to settle for in this life

this loneliness comes from the fact that we do celibacy and mixed-orientation marriages poorly
I want to focus particularly on celibacy here, because while all marriages are challenging and mixed-orientation marriage must manage some unique challenges, they benefit greatly from the ways our churches are organically optimized for nuclear families
they benefit from that privilege

Why are gay celibate Christians lonely?
Well its not because they have greater needs or because celibacy is inherently more lonely or because we all need romance and sex

no, gay celibacy Christians are lonely because we are doing celibacy poorly
but its not just gay Christians who doing celibacy poorly
all Christians are doing celibacy poorly



Doing celibacy poorly



Celibacy has devolved into an infrequent, exceptional calling to loneliness for the sake of the gospel

This is NOT God’s design for celibacy

[Notes]
instead of living into God’s design for the vocation of committed, lifelong celibacy for the sake of the kingdom
instead of embodying the gospel for our world by enjoying deep community while denying the idol of our age and leveraging our availability to minister to the poor, sick, immigrants, refugees, and those struggling with mental illness
instead of modeling for our married friends a different way of finding family by building intentional Christian communities sustained by lifelong commitments
instead of thriving in celibacy...

Catholics and Protestants and Orthodox Christians have allowed celibacy devolve into an infrequent, exceptional calling
to loneliness and having shallow relational roots
for the sake of the gospel

That is NOT God’s design for celibacy
If that is how you are living out your celibacy, that is why you are lonely

If married Christians were failing to live into God’s design for that vocation by
isolating themselves, moving every 5 years, getting divorced and remarried every 10 years, etc
and then complaining they were lonely, we would quickly point out that they are lonely because they are doing marriage wrong




Doing celibacy poorly



Gay celibate Christians aren’t struggling because they are gay or because being celibate is supposed to be more difficult than marriage.

Few gay celibate Christians do celibacy well.

[Notes]
what I am trying to say is that for most gay celibate Christians, the reason why they are struggling isn’t because they are gay
or because being celibate is supposed to be more difficult than marriage
but because very few of us are actually doing celibacy well



It’s not your fault



None of your churches taught, modeled, discerned, supported, or celebrated celibacy.

It’s the Church’s fault.

The solution is for the Church to do it’s job.

[Notes]
but let me be clear: it’s not your fault
it’s not your fault that you do it poorly
because none of your churches taught, modeled, discerned, supported, or celebrated celibacy for you growing up
no straight people are doing what you are doing—a vast majority are only single for a short season
your churches aren’t places where a gay Christian could thrive in celibacy with reasonable effort
and that’s not your fault
that’s your church’s
that is the responsibility of your church to be a place where you could reasonably thrive
so the solution isn’t for you to put even more effort into doing that well
the solution is for your churches to get off their asses and do something about it



Why only the gays?



We don’t teach straight people about it.

We don’t invite straight people to consider it.

Straight people assume they will be marriage and they can go take it.


[Notes]
I said earlier that celibacy isn’t just for gay Christians
and gay Christians aren’t the only people struggling in celibacy
yet gay Christians seem to be the only people sounding the alarm bells about churches poor teaching and support of celibacy
why?

our churches don’t teach what the bible has to say about celibacy
our churches never invite straight people to consider it
our churches lead straight people to believe that you only have to be celibate if God disrupts your life and gives you an undeniable call
our churches allow straight people to assume that they get to choose whether they get married or commit to celibacy, so if they want to be married, they can go take it
our churches teach that celibacy is only for asexual people or it’s only for gay people or it's only for those people who don't want to be married or have children.



Why only the gays?



Side B gay Christians are the only people who stop and ask, “God, what do You want for my life, regardless of my preference?”

And the Church ignores us.

[Notes]
so Side B gay Christians are the only people who stop and ask, “God, what do you want for my life, regardless of my preference?”
even straight Christian women who are single have a good chance of eventually finding a spouse if they are determined to get married, so they don’t have to recon with a lifetime vocation of celibacy
no, gay Christians are the only people considering celibacy
so because there are so few people doing celibacy, and the group of people doing celibacy are these weird gay Christians
well then, churches can ignore them
they can neglect to meaningfully invest in any way to support celibate people



This hurts everyone



The Church’s lack of teaching and support of celibacy hurts married people, widows, divorces, and single adult women.

[Notes]
but this doesn’t just hurt gay celibate Christians
we are merely canaries in a coal mine
are suffering are the first visible symptoms of a larger problem: churches don’t teach or support celibacy to everyone’s detriment

Without a robust theology and practice of lifetime singleness, people rush into marriage, leading to adultery and divorce. 33% of Christian marriages end in divorce—at the same rate as non-Christians. Marriage is perverted from being a beautiful vocation with specific theological and missional purposes for some to being merely a vehicle for guilt-free romance and sex for any Christian who wants to take it. We don’t ask God what His best is for us, and we dive into marriage for the wrong reasons and with the wrong expectations. Without a meaningful minority of Christians committed to lifetime singleness, nuclear families struggle to raise their kids because they don’t have the help of celibate Christians. And because kids grow up seeing marriage as the only option and used in these ways, the pattern of suffering continues.

Widows, divorcees, and single adult women also suffer because of our churches’ poor teaching and support of celibacy. These people on the margins are disproportionately affected by our poverty of teaching and support of lifetime singleness. While gay Christians may be most acutely affected by a poor theology and practice of celibacy, women are certainly most numerously affected. A 2018 study found that there are 50% more single women than single men in the Church. Because of the fewer number of faithful men in the Church, many single women involuntarily continue in singleness because the numbers just aren’t there. Widows and divorcees re-enter singleness to find a Church that will not support them.



This hurts everyone



The Church’s lack of teaching and support of celibacy hurts married people, widows, divorces, and single adult women.

[Notes]
but if more than just gay celibate Christians suffer from our churches poor support of celibacy
that also means that many more than just gay celibate Christians will benefit from better support
its not just good for the gays
everyone will benefit
if both marriage and celibacy are seen as beautiful possibilities and every Christian asks God whether He prefers we step into celibacy or marriage, then those called to married will step into it for the right reasons and are more likely to thrive
plus, we will start to have a meaningful minority of straight Christians stepping into celibacy
leading to a powerful minority of the Church radically available to minister to the poor, sick, immigrants, refugees, and those struggling with mental illness—to bring the gospel alive in a way that draws people to Jesus
you want to talk about revival in the church in America
send 10% of Christians out to spend their lives healing our communities instead of raising children, and you will see a revival in America



Turn & Talk	





Which of the following statements are true about your church, and how does that effect gay people in your church?
We don’t teach straight people about celibacy.
We don’t invite straight people to consider celibacy.
Straight people assume they will be married and they can go take it.

???



THRIVING


[Notes]
For the rest of our time, we’re going to talk about 5 practical steps your church can take to cultivate celibacy
And 5 practical steps your church can take to cultivate mixed-orientation marriages

I want to note that these steps don’t just apply to celibacy and Christian marriage involving LGBT+ people
Taking these steps will help your churches become places where all people, gay or straight, can thrive in celibacy and marriage



Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – across the lifespan
Model it – church leadership
Celebrate it – show that it is valued
Discern it – listen and accept the call
Support it – integrate them in families



Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – 
Across the lifespan, we must share the rich theology of celibacy in Scripture

[Notes]
We need to teach children, teens, adult singles, and married people in our churches about the rich theology of celibacy in Scripture





Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – 
A lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom

[Notes]
what should we teach, and why?
I want to clarify that when we say celibacy, we’re not talking about temporary singleness or waiting for marriage
while our churches need to do a better job supporting people in those places
The Church has historically and consistently taught that Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7 aren’t commending temporary singleness
they are commending a commitment to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
let me break down that phrase “lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom”





Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – “lifetime vocation”
Everyone has the same inherent, but incomplete capacity for marriage and celibacy
Every Christian should ask God which vocation He is calling them to
God provides a provision of grace to thrive

[Notes]
“lifetime vocation” - The Church has taught that everyone has the same inherent, but incomplete, capacity for marriage and celibacy, and that every Christian should ask God which vocation God is calling them to
the vocations of marriage and celibacy are both lifetime
and when a person answer a call to either marriage or celibacy, God provides a provision of grace to do that vocation well





Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – “of singleness”
Vocational celibacy involves giving up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Vocational celibacy is still a call to enjoy intimacy in the context of committed family

[Notes]
“of singleness” - The Church has taught that this commitment involves giving up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
The Church has also taught that a call to vocational singleness is still a call to enjoy intimacy in the context of committed family




Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – “for the sake of the kingdom”
Vocational celibates use their availability to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time or energy to do

[Notes]
“for the sake of the kingdom” - why has God designed this vocation to involve giving up romance, dating, marriage, and sex?
so that the celibacy can use the availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do






Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – 
A lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom

[Notes]
why is it important to make these distinctions?

as you can see, vocational singleness is very different than temporary singleness
so a church that is just aiming to teach and support temporary singleness isn’t going to do anything for those called to vocational singleness
you might disagree with me about my distinction between vocational singleness and temporary singleness, but I can assure you that that distinction has been taught by the Church for 2000 years and the Protestant theologians who have offered a systematic theology of the kind of singleness spoke of in Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7 arrived at the same conclusions

So every time we talk about marriage, we need to talk about celibacy

From a young age, we need to start sharing that both marriage and celibacy are beautiful possibilities
And just as much as we talk about the beauty of being a father or a mother, we need to talk about the beauty of heroes of the faith who were able to do more for the kingdom because they were single
As they reach puberty and start to explore relationships with others, our argument for abstinence shouldn’t be based on “saving ourselves for marriage”
But instead focus on pleasing God and God’s design for relationship, recognizing the possibilities of marriage and celibacy

How do we do this, practically?



Thriving in Celibacy



Teach it – 
Study this carefully alone and with other leaders
Teach parents to think and teach
Teach students at all ages

[Notes]
Well first, before you or other leaders at your church start teaching on this topic, you have to know what you believe
Are you convinced of what we offered here today?
Or are you hanging on to another theology that is more culturally convenient but lacks evidence?
You need to rethink how you think theologically about celibacy, and you need to study that with other leaders in your church

Ex) bring in experts about this to help you think well, and some of those experts should be people who are actually committed to this vocation

Then before you ever talk to teens or children about this, you need to teach parents
They will spend many more hours with their children than you will
And even if they never think they’ve had a theological conversation with their kids, we send signals every day about how we think the world works and what we think is most beautiful
Does the average parent in your church believe what we taught today? Would they be able to teach it to their kids?
If not, what do they believe, and what are they teaching their kids, even if unintentionally?

Ex) one way you can justify this is before doing a teaching with teens, invite parents to a parents-only preview where your real goal is to educate parents
Say something like, “We want to take you through the same context we’ll take your teens through so you know what they’re hearing and you’re ready to respond to questions in the home”

After that, we need to teach students at all ages
We need to weave conversation about lifetime singleness into Bible stories, and we need to tell stories about Paul and Jesus and their celibacy
We need to teach teens about this before they go through middle school, so that when romantic and sexual desires hit them, they aren’t prone to running to the idol of romance
We need to prepare graduating teens from your youth group to have a mature theological and practical understanding of marriage and celibacy

Ex) In most churches, your members have heard nothing about this, so an extended sermon series pressing the reset button on your church’s theology of vocational singleness might be helpful
Ex) For those of you who have a lot of young adults, many of your members might be in the stage of temporary singleness and discontent. Teaching about vocational singleness can help those called to it step into the vocation, and it can teach those in temporary singleness how to value and live out their state temporarily

I would be happy to help your church take these steps



Thriving in Celibacy



Model it – 
To imagine a future that is good and valued, children must see celibate people thriving and leading

[Notes]
Celibacy must be modeled in our churches

we can only imagine a future for ourselves that we see modeled
we will only imagine that future as good and valuable if it is modeled as being such
so the children in our churches need to see celibate people in our churches thriving
the children in our churches need to see celibate people in places of leadership, upfront, honored



Thriving in Celibacy



Model it – 
Seek out single people as leaders in your church
Invite single people into your homes

[Notes]
First, your church can be intentional about seeking out leaders who are single
Not only do our children need to see single people valued and as leaders, but they have so much to offer the church in their singleness
We need single head pastors, preaching pastors, worship leaders, youth pastors, children’s pastors, bible study leaders, small group leaders, Sunday school leaders, mentors, elders, youth volunteers, etc.

Invite single people into your homes to be part of your families
children need to hear and see this done well so they can imagine it as a good thing for them



Thriving in Celibacy



Celebrate it – 
Find ways to mark and celebrate the commitments and milestones of celibate people

[Notes]
Celebrate the lives of celibate people

mother’s day, father’s day, anniversaries, marriages, engagement parties, baptism, baby showers
what for celibates? how do we mark and celebrate their commitment?

if there are vows, celebrate and anniversary that ceremony – gather friends and family, witness the individual make commitments to celibacy to God, and have a party afterward
by putting in leadership and valuing
honoring/commissioning leaders
what about those occasions that are harder without a spouse: birthdays, holidays, vacations, buy a home, 




Thriving in Celibacy



Discern it – 
Help teens develop their “spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Invite them to start asking God, “What is your preference?”
Clear emotional and theological hurdles
Continuing supporting discernment

[Notes]
Help teens in your church discern whether they are called to celibacy or marriage

as we teach children and teens how to think theologically about their sexual stewardship and relational vocation, we need to also invite them to discern that
with parents, with mentors, in prayer and Scripture with the Holy Spirit

Here’s what that could look like practically:

Before we start discerning any specific questions, we need to help teens develop their ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do they know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of their question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or celibacy, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions

Ex) if you’re not sure how to teach someone to discern spiritual questions, or you’re not sure how to discern yourself, I would recommend you check out God’s Voice Within by Mark Thibodeau. It’s a really accessible book about Ignatian Discernment that is Protestant-friendly

invite them to start asking God that question
Invite to ask, “God, would you prefer that I commit to celibacy or get married?”
Will God punish us for choosing the lesser path? I don’t see any support in Scripture for that
But are there likely some consequences for following our preference over God’s? probably
I’m confident that we would probably enjoy the most goodness and beauty in this life by following God’s preference
Helpful paths of exploration might be whether God seems to have called a person to an occupational vocation that would be better complemented by celibacy
Or look into past and present circumstances to see if the person has a string of experiences suggests that God might prefer the person to commit to singleness for the sake of the kingdom? Or the contrary?

make sure their are no emotional or theological hurdles to either vocation
We want to clear out any biases against either vocation so that we can better receive God’s call
This might look like studying theology of both marriage and celibacy to make sure you have a healthy understanding of both
We also need to take care any emotional hurdles, any past experiences that biases us against either vocation on an emotional level
Perhaps for you that’s the idol of romance or divorce in their family
All of these may bias their discernment in harmful ways
So we need to help teens work through any biases they might have so they can more clearly hear God’s preference

continue supporting discernment in college and beyond
Few teens will know with certainty what God is calling them to before they graduate from high school
Many will continuing discerning late into their 20s, and maybe beyond
We can provide continued support for an individual’s discernment



Thriving in Celibacy



Support it – 
Help celibate people stay in, join, or build family in the body of Christ

[Notes]
Support celibate people by helping them find family

in general, help them have a better experience of family in the body of Christ
bigger church fellowship
multiple phase of life small groups
but as we’ve noted, celibate people need intimate, spiritually procreative, and covenant-bound relationships that are maintained through sacrifice
help them find their inner family



Thriving in Celibacy



Support it – 
Large church fellowship
Diverse small groups
Invite singles to couples-only activities
Ask single people what they need and how they want to serve

[Notes]
One of the biggest ways we can support celibate people is by helping them find family

First, we can help them experience family in your church
Start with bigger church fellowships where single people can see themselves as part of a big family—I know it’s harder for larger churches or less conventional churches to have these gatherings, but when a single person’s only connection to the church is showing up alone on Sunday and then a rotating door of small groups, they can feel disconnected from something larger and stable

Then, I’d encourage you to have small group or life groups that bring together people from different stages in life. The only thing worse than finding myself in a small group of only single people where every other guy and girl is trying to figure out who they are going to marry is finding myself in a small group full of newly-marrieds and young parents with one child. The loneliness their for the person committed to lifetime singleness is deep. Instead, let’s trying for diverse small groups that include older adults, older couples, widows, divorcees, and families with kids at different stages. We all have things to learn from each other, and we will feel more connected with the church as a whole when your small group actually reflects the average demographics of the church.

I can’t tell you how often single people shoot out texts seeing what people are doing, end up spending the night alone, and then check facebook or Instagram the next day to find some of their married friends got together for couples-only stuff. Sometimes this is intentional exclusion because couples prefer to hang out with other couples. I’m sure I don’t need to point out the problems with that. But more often, couples think single people would be uncomfortable hanging out with a group of couples, so they don’t invite them. Frequently, I’ve learned about a game night or a dinner party or a bible study of friends that I wasn’t invited to, and when I asked around more, they said they didn’t think I’d want to be there. Please, go out of your way to invite single people to things you might consider couples-only.

And last but not least, ask single people what they need. Get a couple of staff together and invite single people to share with you what they need—they’ll have a better idea than you or me. And, ask them how they’d like to get more involved—how they’d like to leverage their singleness to do even more kingdom work.
but as we’ve noted, celibate people need intimate, committed relationships, just like their married friends
They need a family of companions who they know will be there in a decade
The people who will be their for dinner at night, or to hear about their day, or to go on vacation with them

So we can help them find their inner family



Thriving in Celibacy



Support it – 
Stay with biological family
Join another nuclear family
Create families of celibate people

[Notes]
Here’s 3 ways celibate people can find family:

First, we can encourage people to stay deeply connected to their biological family. This might look like living with a parent, a sibling, or a cousin, doing rhythms of family with those people, and committing to helping them raise the children in that household.

Or, you might help single people knit themselves into unrelated nuclear families in your church. Maybe people go out of their way to choose celibate people as godparents for their children. Or you invite single people to weekly dinner with your family. Or include them in holidays and vacations. You could even invite single people to live in your home, commit to your family, and help you raise your kids.

Or third, you can help celibate people create families of their own
Help celibate people gather together and commit to being family for each other and doing rhythms of family together.
This is perhaps the least conventional of the options suggested here, and while it might be the most beautiful, it also involved the most logistics.
Churches can help support celibate people in creating these intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it, providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and maybe even providing financial support in the early years.
For example, a group of 5 guys and I in Nashville are discerning whether God has called us to start an intentional Christian community for men committed to celibacy where we would take vows committing to do life together for the rest of our lives. This are the kind of solutions the Church needs

Regardless of which path they take, they need intimate, committed, and permanent family just like everyone else
You’ve noticed that each solution involves living together and commitment
We need to help celibate people find that
Because it is particularly hard for celibate people to find that
And the paths are often unconventional



Turn & Talk	





What first step will you take in your church?
What barriers will you need to overcome?
???



Amber Carroll of



Turn & Talk	





What would you add to this list of suggestions?
What is needed in your church?
What barriers will you need to overcome?
63



CONNECT


[Notes]
If you are interested in EQUIP partnering with your church
Learning more about our mission and strategy
Supporting the work of EQUIP financially
Or personally getting involved in the work

EQUIP’s contact information is on the last page of your handout
Please reach out to us
We’re happy to connect with every single one of you over the phone in the coming weeks to help your churches becomes places of thriving



QUESTIONS?

