


GET YOUR

BLUEPRINT






Training Goal
To equip your community with the understanding and skills to better love and serve LGBT+ people






Training Objectives
Empathize with LGBT+ people and become churches where all people can belong
Offer God’s narrative for sexual stewardship to all and help LGBT+ people take hold of that
Develop a posture and expertise for individual ministry to LGBT+ people




How we used to do it






Behave
Believe
Belong

[Notes]
framework


A better strategy



Believe
Belong
Become




[Notes]
BELONG – LGBT+ people can find acceptance and unconditional love, talk about their experiences without shame, find meaningful, intimate community
BELIEVE – offer complex and winsome theology of sexuality, walk alongside people as they come to believe what is true
BECOME – compassionately and effectively minister to LGBT+ persons as they become who Christ has called them to be



A better strategy



Belong

Believe


[Notes]
Explore a traditional sexual ethic and practical steps to building meaningful community



Session 2: BELIEVE
Hear God’s narrative for sexual stewardship and how that is good
Recognize how we have done that poorly
Explore how we can better support vocational singleness and mixed-orientation marriages




[Notes]
specifically—it’s not enough to merely tell people what is right and wrong, we must help LGBT+ people take hold of what is good so that they can truly BELIEVE that God is good




THINK


[Notes]
Why explore theology?
we act from what we believe
need a compassionate, consistent, theologically accurate foundation
so we can share winsomely
so that we can answer why questions
and so that we can cast vision for the Church



What do I believe?



Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay. (Romans 1:26-28, Romans 5:12, James 1:13, Psalm 51:5)
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin. (Matthew 6:12-13; James 1:14-15; Hebrews 4:15)

[Notes]
open up with my beliefs
to be transparent
where did they come from? scripture + tradition (church mothers and fathers, global christians today, bishops) + experience + reason (best practices of counseling, demographic data about LGBT+ people)

I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction, me finding other guys physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them, being gay, is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness. Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world. To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, he would have expected me to be experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions



What do I believe?



God does not send people to hell merely for being gay. (John 10:28-30; Romans 8:38-39; Ephesians 4:30) 
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we do choose how we respond.

[Notes]
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin, but God doesn’t hold against me my involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

I do not believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond






A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a person’s attractions.
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage. (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7, Ephesians 5)

What do I believe?

[Notes]
The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants, but scientific studies show that only 3-4% of people report experiencing any meaningful change in their same-sex attractions.

What does the Bible have to say about all of this? Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to vocational singleness—to give up the prospect of romance, dating, sex, marriage, and children to do kingdom work parents don’t have the time or energy to do--or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex






There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context. (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10)
What do I believe?

[Notes]
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context



Share
How do these align with your beliefs? Your community’s beliefs?



11



Why?



What makes a sin sinful?
Arbitrary lines? No
Fun-killer? No
That which will hurt us


[Notes]
but more important than what I believe is why
broadly, why is a sin a sin?



Why?



What makes a sin sinful?
Is it honoring to God? (1 Peter 4:10) 
Is it harmful to self or others? (Matthew 7:12) 
Is it habit-forming? (1 Corinthians 6:12) 
Is it helpful to self or others? (Romans 13:10) 


[Notes]
anal bleeding
Excretion
lose control of bowel movements
Risk: colon cancer
Prevalence: HIV infection
alcohol and substance abuse
Suicide
infedelity

Oppression or bad fruit? Problematic argument
-> the Bible






Why?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin (Romans 1; Leviticus 18:22; Leviticus 20:13; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10) 

Marriage defined between man and women (Genesis 2:24; Matthew 19:4-5) 

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage (Genesis 19:1-9) 

Written for a people in a time and place

[Notes]
Now that we’ve answered the question about what makes a sin sinful, let’s apply that to the question of whether same-sex sexual activity is a sin



The Big Question



We should NOT be asking, “What is permissible?”

We should be asking, “What is most good and will bring the most blessing in my life?”

We have to offer one narrative for God-honoring sexual stewardship that sufficiently speaks everyone’s story, including those who experience same-sex attraction.

[Notes]
Many push back against those 5 verses, saying that they don’t condemn same-sex, loving, monogamous marriages with certainty
really, that’s a person who wants something to be true and unless there’s an undeniable argument against it
We shouldn’t be asking “is this permissible?”

We should be asking what is most good?
What will bring the most blessing to my life?
And then don’t settle for anything less
sin = settling for less than thriving?

So we can’t just argue against a sinful behavior
We have to offer the most good things
We have to cast a vision for sexual stewardship that sufficiently speaks to the stories of LGBT+ people and the challenges they face

To do so, we have to look more broadly at how God created all of us for intimacy in the context of family
That’s what I want to spend the biggest chunk of our time today doing: demonstrating how you could invite everyone in your church to think theologically about their sexualities in a way that calls everyone to life-giving sexual stewardship, including LGBT+ people
But you will quickly see why the Church is having a problem: few churches preach these things and even fewer really believe them and invest time and energy accordingly



Intimacy & Family



God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.

God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.

[Notes]
God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family. How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys intimacy in the context of family, and He created us in His image for those same things.
 
God put Himself in families. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a family called the Trinity. And the Trinity created this world, made man, gave us choice, and sent His son to live a perfect life and die on the cross for our sins so that we could be a part of His family. The Bible goes even further to establish that God is in family and He invites us into that family by calling us, the group of people who follow Jesus, Christ’s bride and calling Jesus our groom. We’re being married into the family of God.

(SKIP) In John 3:29, John the Baptist meets Jesus for the first time and describes himself as a guest at a wedding where Jesus is the groom and the people of God are his bride. In Ephesians 5 Paul uses an analogy of a husband and wife to teach Christ-followers to submit to God and to celebrate that we are Christ’s bride. Finally, in Revelation 19:6-9, the Apostle John describes a wedding feast at the end of time when Christ returns triumphantly to celebrate being united with his bride, the Church—that’s us!



Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
But God isn’t just a being in a family. The love enjoyed in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church is a particular kind of love. Historically, Christians have characterized that love in six ways: God’s love is complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable:

First, God’s love is complementary or diverse. There is a different-ness between the persons of the Trinity—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. And there is complementarity between Christ and his bride, the Church.

(SKIP) In Revelations 7:9, the Apostle John describes a celebration of the diversity of God’s people: “After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne…”
 
Second, God’s love is intimate. The persons of the Trinity know each other perfectly and are fully known by each other.

(SKIP) In John 17:20, Jesus speaks longingly about the Trinity when praying for his disciples: “‘My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they...be one as we are one—I in them and you in me—so that they may be brought to complete unity. Then the world will know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.’” God the Father reciprocates this affection. Just after Jesus is baptized, the following happens in Matthew 3:16-17” “...At that moment heaven was opened, and [Jesus] saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said, ‘This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.’”
 
Plus, Christ intimately knows and loves His people and wants them to seek out relationship with Him.

(SKIP)  1 John 4: 7, 8, and 19 say, “Dear friends, let us love one another, for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love. We love because he first loved us.” We can only love because God Himself is love, made us to be creatures who love, and loved us first.
 
Third, God’s love is procreative or life-giving. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit made the world, filled it with animals, and made us humans, together. The Trinity gave us life. And then God became man and Jesus lived and died for us so that we could have life.

In John 10:10 Jesus says, “I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full.” Without Jesus we are dead people walking. We have sinned against God, and we do not deserve to join Him in heaven. But Jesus paid the price for our sins so that we could have eternal life.
 
Fourth, the love of God is faithful or permanent. There is a perfect and permanent faithfulness in the Trinity and from Christ to His people. No matter what we do, God will never abandon us or withhold his love.

(SKIP) Lamentations 3:22-23 says it this way: “The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases; His mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning; great is [God’s] faithfulness.”
 
Fifth, the love of God is sacrificial. As we’ve already mentioned, Jesus offered himself up as a perfect sacrifice so that all of God’s children could return to Him. 

(SKIP) Paul describes Christ’s sacrifice in this way in Romans 5:6 and 8: “You see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly... But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.”
 
And finally, the love of God is hospitable. Ultimately, the work of creating this world and humans to fill it was an invitation into God’s family. And then God extended His arms of invitation again by dying on the cross so we could be reunited with Him.




Intimacy & Family



We are created in God’s image for that kind of love with God and each other

Sexuality – our need for relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive that kind of love

[Notes]
Because we are created in God’s image, we are made for that kind of love with God and each other
we are all made for complementary, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality

our sexuality is our need for those things
our need to be in relationship
to know and be known
to give and receive love
and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on cognitive, physical, and spiritual levels



Intimacy & Family



We are all created for intimacy in the context of family.

Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

[Notes]
Plus, we are all created to enjoy this within the context of family. But when I say family, I don’t just mean married people and kids. In Matthew 12:46-50, Jesus subverts our understanding of family, rejecting familial ties based solely on biology and instead establishing that Christian family is bound by the blood of Christ:
 
“While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him. Someone told him, ‘Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.’ But to the one who had told him this, Jesus replied, ‘Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?’ And pointing to his disciples, he said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers! For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.’”
 
Jesus defines Christian family as a small community of Christians who live life together and embody the gospel for each other. From the beginning, families made up of God’s children were intended to imitate the love within the Trinity and between God and His people: to bear the image of that love. The love found in families was intended to be intimate, faithful, sacrificial, diverse, live-giving, and hospitable, embodying God’s love in beautiful ways.



Intimacy & Family



Neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs.

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime.

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.


[Notes]
3 caveats:

neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meeting our intimacy needs

None of us will meet our intimacy needs fully and finally in this lifetime. Isaiah 59:2 says that our sins, our imperfection, our unwise choices have separated us from God and each other. Because this world is broken and we are broken, we can only ever connect with God and each other imperfectly. There’s this distance because of brokenness that we can never cross. Some amount of loneliness is a part of life. It is unavoidable.
 
So should we just give up and stop trying to connect in healthy ways? No! For starters, even if we can’t meet all of our needs fully and finally, we can still get a lot of what we need. We can still enjoy rich, satisfying intimacy with God and other people in this life. And second, if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, the broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts.




Intimacy & Family



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matt 19, Rev 7:9, Gen 1)
Intimate (1 John 17:20, Matt 3:16-17, 1 John 4)
Procreative (Gen 1:28, John 10:10)
Faithful (Isa 54:6-8, Hos 3:1)
Sacrificial (Eph 5:23, Gal 6:2)
Hospitable (Luke 14, Leviticus 19)

[Notes]
So God has made all of us to enjoy intimacy in the context of family.
And the love we enjoy in that family should point us back to the love in God’s family, should serve as an image of God’s love, should embody the gospel by being complementary, intimate, procreative, faithful, sacrificial, and hospitable

So what does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?
Well, God has given us two specific ways to do that, he has designed two vocations for stewarding our sexualities in ways that honor Him and point us back to Him: vocational singleness and Christian marriage
Both of these vocations embody those 6 characteristics of the love in God’s family
Both vocations are calls to intimacy in the context of human family

Why do I say vocation? Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children

The practice of vocational singleness and Christian marriage in our churches should be so beautiful that those who do not yet know Jesus want to draw close to them and get to know the Source of that love
When non-believers step into the homes of Christian marriages or vocational singles living together as a family, the love found there should help people believe that God loves them
And they should experience God’s love through those families

That’s why it’s so important for our churches to be places where people are thriving in Christian marriage and vocational singleness—because the gospel depends on it
And that’s why we have to teach accurately about these



Sexual Stewardship



All first called to a period of temporary singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to a vocation of Christian marriage
Others called to a vocation of singleness for the kingdom

[Notes]
So, how does a Christian know which of these vocations they are called to?
What’s God’s design for each of these vocations?
How do we do them well?

Here’s a summary of what I understand to be Christian orthodoxy for how God invites us to steward our sexualities



Sexual Stewardship




[Notes]
Here’s a representation of those same idea in a diagram
As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of languishing in temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

Remember, I’ll tease out all of these claims in the slides to come



Share



How different is this diagram of sexual stewardship from what you learned growing up?

How might seeing oneself called to temporary singleness and assuming neither marriage nor vocational singleness be beneficial?
31

[Notes]
SL



Temporary Singleness



A period of temporary singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong vocational singleness nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others

[Notes]
What are we first called to?

We are all first called to a temporary period of abstinent singleness in which we enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ in non-sexual, non-romantic companionship.
We should all learn to do this well
This is a calling to neither vocational singleness nor marriage—defining our default calling in the negative is not sufficient but it is informative—we are not yet called to vocational singleness or to marriage. 
We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires, want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 
We should all submit our sexuality to God, study what the Scriptures have to say about sexual stewardship, and discern with God and spiritual mentors in our lives whether we are called to vocational singleness or marriage.

As I mentioned earlier, the Church has consistently taught that it is NOT God’s intention for Christians to continue in temporary for a lifetime
For the vast majority, it is better to settle down into vocational singleness or marriage
But there are always exceptions to the rule
There will be people whom God calls to leave open the possibility of vocational singleness or marriage in there 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps even their entire life
Our churches need to honor and support all those who are faithfully following God’s call







Why should everyone discern?
Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen


Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
I mentioned that everyone should discern this questions of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
That we should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference
Why?

God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

Our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires







A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness. 
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
now a single person might push back
God has given me a desire to marry
to be a parent
And being single doesn’t come easily to me
I don’t have what it takes to be single for a lifetime
Marriage is natural, but being single for a lifetime is supernatural

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single tells us we’re called to marriage—the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention

And marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally natural
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness? No.
But the same is true of marriage. We don’t have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polygamy are natural.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and marriage
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well

So we should all discern which God has called us to








5 Ingredients for Wise Discernment
Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
so what does it look like to ask God this question
to give God a chance
to discern?

Here’s 5 suggestions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.






Share



What hesitations do you have to inviting every Christian to discern between vocational singleness and marriage?

What are other helpful ingredients for wise discernment?


31

[Notes]
SL






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those






“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
We’ve already established that God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
At this point, I think it’d be helpful to make a distinction between temporary singleness and the vocational singleness I’m talking about here
we are all born into temporary singleness
that’s our default state
and then some of us are called to Christian marriage
and others of us are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness for the sake of the kingdom
 
why is it important to make that distinction?
because there’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage versus accepting a call to permanently give up the prospect of romance, sex, marriage, or children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work parents can’t
My friends in temporary singleness seem to be only shallowly rooted in their spiritual families and the kingdom work they’re doing, because they need to always be prepared to reorganize their lives around a future marriage
and the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage every Christian to consider singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
they’re commending vocational singleness
In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness
so I want to particularly focus on vocational singleness, because that’s the one we don’t hear much about in church
Plus, even if you’re only single temporarily, I think there are ways you can borrow from vocational singleness, even if only for a time






“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship






“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth 
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE
Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.
But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.
Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.






Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy






Diverse – differentness of personalities, sexes, ages
Intimate – still a call to family, fullness of God’s love in NHNE
Faithful – permanent and lifetime, consistent kingdom work
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now, let’s look at the ways singleness for the sake of the kingdom embodies those six characteristics of love found in the Trinity and between Christ and His Church.


1. Vocational singleness is diverse. The friendships enjoyed by those committed to vocational singleness reflect the diversity in God’s family. There is a differentness between the persons in each friendship. Plus, vocational singles still need healthy relationships with people of the opposite sex, parents, and children. Vocational singleness is still a call to a diversity of friendships with people of all ages and stages of life. This differentness points observers back to the complementarity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church as well as the unity found in the body of Christ even amidst differences.

2. Vocational singleness is intimate. As already mentioned, vocational singleness is still a call to intimacy in the context of family. Jesus and Paul recognize vocational singles’ need for committed companionship and promise a 100-fold of family in this lifetime (reference). This intimacy points observers back to the intimacy in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. The family vocational singles enjoy testifies to the fullness of God’s love and gives every Christian hope for how we will all live in the New Heavens and New Earth.

3. Vocational singleness is faithful. The permanent, lifetime nature of a commitment to vocational singleness reflects the faithfulness of God’s love found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church. Through this vocation, those called faithfully live out their singleness for the Lord consistently build up the kingdom in ways that point back to the faithfulness of the love in God’s family.







Life-giving – spiritually procreative and more kingdom work
Sacrificial – give up idol of romance to follow Jesus
Hospitable – offer family to lonely
Vocational singleness is…
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
4. Vocational singleness is life-giving. While those called to vocational singleness do not bear biological children, their availability for kingdom works should bear the fruit of many times more spiritual children. The vocationally single have the time and energy to share the gospel with more not-yet-believers and mentor more new Christians than parents can. Plus, those called to vocational singleness reflect the procreative nature of God’s love by building up the kingdom and bringing spiritual life to the Church.

5. Vocational singleness is sacrificial. At first glance, those called to vocational singleness have chosen to give up their right to some of our culture’s most coveted experiences: romance, dating, marriage, and sex. The sacrifice of vocational singles points observers back to the sacrificial nature of the love in God’s family.

6. Vocational singleness is hospitable. Those called to vocational singleness have the unique opportunity to offer family to those on the margins without the need to compete for belonging. This hospitality reflects the welcoming nature of the love in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.



Share



Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.

How is this teaching different than how you were taught to think about the singleness discussed in Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7?
55

[Notes]





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage…
Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage

Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…
Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.
In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce, giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention. Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence, but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception, and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception. Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce. Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine (1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman…
God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman
God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage. In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman. In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband. Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.





Christian Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.
God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)

For those who are called to marriage, they should recognize that marriage will be one of the most difficult things they do








How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
How does Christian marriage specifically embody the gospel and reflect the Trinity and God’s relationship with the Church?

complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically
intimate - sexually, emotionally, and spiritually






How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences
Hospitable – opening one’s home up to those outside of the nuclear family
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
procreative - raise children
faithful - lifetime
sacrificial - in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer
hospitable - invite others into home

those called to marriage will thrive when they seek to fulfill these purposes
Churches must teach accurately about what marriage is and support families to keep their vows and raise children



Share



The idea that Christian marriage must embody the procreative and complementary natures of God’s love has been contentious. How essential are these? What are the consequences of dismissing these as essential?
39

[Notes]
SL



Why does it matter?



Both are about embodying the gospel:
Diverse, intimate, and procreative relationships maintained by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality point to the Trinity and Christ + the Church
Vocational singleness reflects Christ’s life and future patterns in the New Heaven and New Earth

[Notes]
So that’s how the Church has taught that God has invited us to steward our sexualities
Why it is so important that we get that right? 
they are both ultimately about embodying the gospel and that makes it a gospel issue
all: we are all made for diverse, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment, sacrifice, and hospitality that ultimately point to God’s love in the Trinity and for His people
Vocational singleness: reflects christ’s life and our future patterns in the NHNE



What about SSA?



If the Church did this well, it would be a place where those who experience SSA could thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage (MOM).

Their callings would be just as beautiful, and the challenges would be no greater.

[Notes]
what does that mean for those who experience SSA?
and why does God’s narrative for sexual stewardship matter to us?

if the Church did this well
It would be a place where those who experience SSA could thrive in vocational singleness or marriage with someone of the opposite sex (just like straight people!)
calling just a beautiful and challenges no greater

Again, our argument is that asking whether something is permissible is the wrong question
We should be asking what is most good?
And God’s narrative says that for every person, the most good will be found in a period of temporary singleness, vocational singleness, or marriage with someone of the opposite sex done correctly

church where vocational singleness taught and valued and just as good
other straight people walking out vocational singleness and thriving
church that recognizes brokenness and talks about brokenness of sexuality
also recognizes what marriage really is
so can thrive in MOM

everyone enjoys meaningful community in the Body of Christ



Share
What about this narrative is challenging? How does it contrast with the narrative of sexual fulfillment offered by culture and many churches?

How is this narrative good and beautiful and compelling for LGBT+ people?



63



THE PROBLEM


[Notes]
but that assumes that the Church is doing this well
news story: We AREN'T
where are our areas of growth?
we can’t get better until we admit we have a problem and we identify them




The Problem(s)



God gave me desires to marry and have kids because He wants me to get married.
Marriage is about companionship and mutual fulfillment.
We only have to have kids if and when we want them.
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually.
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close.

[Notes]
So, what does the Church really believe today?



The Problem(s)



The Church isn’t doing this well:
Straight Christians aren’t upholding the sanctity of marriage
There is no support for vocational singleness
We live disconnected, isolated lives

[Notes]
What are the results of having those beliefs?

we don’t refrain from emotional and physically intimate relationships before marriage
we assume we will be married, that marriage will satisfy, and that marriage is about making you happy
we no longer honor “through thick and thin” or see raising children as central
straight Christians aren’t upholding the sanctity of marriage

few consider vocational singleness as a calling
relegated to a curse of loneliness for the sake of the gospel
there is no support for vocational singleness because no straight people aren't doing it

don’t learn to do friendship well, have loose friendships
fear of close, same-sex friendships
don’t do life as a Body of Christ



The Problem(s)



This hurts Christians who experience same-sex attraction
Cannot thrive in vocational singleness or a MOM
We offer only Side A or Side X
Why should gay people be called to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?

[Notes]
these things hurt Christians who experience same-sex attraction
few churches are places where those who experience same-sex attraction can truly thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed orientation marriage (MOMs have been attacked for the past decade)
we offer Side A and Side X
we don’t offer an alternative that recognizes the challenges and answers questions people have
if we do not do this, we cannot blame unmarried people for reaching out for forbidden things from a place of loneliness
if straight people aren’t taking marriage seriously or considering vocational singleness, why should gay people call themselves to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?
the solution starts with straight married people stewarding their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic
If straight people really believed these things and lived them out, there would be support for vocational singleness and MOMs



The Problem(s)



This hurts straight Christians, too
Children grow up hearing all people will be straight, married, and have kids
Failed marriages due to refusing a call to vocational singleness and inaccurate expectations
Vocational singles struggle with loneliness and married people raise children alone

[Notes]
important for straight people
children are hearing that all people will be straight, married, with kids
but for many than won’t be the case
many failed marriages due to refusing a call to vocational singleness
and not accurately seeing marriage as a vocation that is lifelong and difficult
marriages would endure if we communicated more accurate expectations
Celibates struggle with loneliness and married people raise children alone
those called to vocational singleness need to see vocational singleness valued/celebrated and thriving modeled
and married people need help with kids from healthy celibates



The Problem(s)



Many people and circumstances on the margins:
Divorce
Widowing
Infertility
Pornography
Masturbation
Fornication
Adultery
Abortion
Contraception
Same-sex attraction
Broken gender

[Notes]
And same-sex attraction is just one of the ways that God’s perfect intentions for human intimacy is bent
there are lots of people and circumstances on the margins
there are lots of ways that the way we do intimacy is broken

divorce
widowing
infertility
pornography (lust, objectification, selfish, commodification)
masturbation
sex outside of marriage
adultery
abortion
contraception
same-sex attraction
broken gender

Some but not all of these are due to individual sin
But these are all communal sins that require a communal responses

So talking theologically about how God has invited us to steward our sexualities doesn’t just help us to answer the question of same-sex marriage
It can also help us respond to each of these areas of brokenness




Share
How have you seen these shortcomings in your community?

How have they impacted Christians in your community—both gay and straight?



74



BELIEVE


[Notes]
So how do we do this better as a Church? How can we better offer God’s teachings?









Become churches where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage
Application: BELIEVE

[Notes]
In short, if you want to serve LGBT+ people well, it takes more than a pastor who can minister individual to LGBT+ people. That is good, and if that pastor truly grasps the complexity of the problem, he or she can lead that congregation toward a real solution:

First, our churches need to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship. We need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness during which we discern whether we are called to a lifetime vocation of singleness or a lifetime vocation of Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex. Our churches should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
 
Second, our churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality. With compassion and theological accuracy, they explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do LGBT+ people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to LGBT+ people good?
As a result, everyone in your church knows how to love LGBT+ people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality. Plus, same-sex attracted people in your church still in the closet will know what you believe, your love for them, and that it is safe to share their story.
 
Third, our churches need to talk about the possibility of same-sex attraction in age-appropriate ways across the lifespan. Before a teen realizes he or she experiences same-sex attraction, the teen hears that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to, that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less, and that God has good and beautiful plans for them. Then, when teens realize their same-sex attractions, they quickly share with their parents and pastors, inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways.
 
Fourth, our churches must provide effective pastoral care to same-sex attracted Christians. They've done what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to same-sex attracted people. While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression, these churches recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured. Parents and pastors help same-sex attracted people integrate their faith and sexuality in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.
 
Fifth, our churches need to become places where same-sex attracted people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort. These churches teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture, adults are modeling thriving in vocational singleness and they are celebrated in the church, and the church invites all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage. Most importantly, these churches are places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find, whether that be through intentional Christian communities of celibate (or celibate and married) people or helping celibates move in with marrieds to be a part of their family. Then, these churches teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for same-sex attracted people, cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.



Application: BELIEVE



Thriving in Vocational Singleness
Teach it – across the lifespan
Model it – church leadership
Discern it – listen and accept the call
Support it – integrate them in families
Celebrate it – show that it is valued



Thriving in Singleness



Teach it – 
Across the lifespan, we must share the rich theology of vocational singleness in Scripture

[Notes]
We need to teach children in our churches about the rich theology of vocational singleness in Scripture
every time we talk about marriage, we need to talk about vocational singleness

From a young age, we need to start sharing that both marriage and vocational singleness are beautiful possibilities
And just as much as we talk about the beauty of being a father or a mother, we need to talk about the beauty of heroes of the faith who were able to do more for the kingdom because they were single
As they reach puberty and start to explore relationships with others, our argument for abstinence shouldn’t be based on “saving ourselves for marriage”
But instead focus on pleasing God and God’s design for relationship, recognizing the possibilities of marriage and vocational singleness

How do we do this, practically?







Teach it – 
Study this carefully alone and with other leaders
Teach parents to think and teach
Teach students at all ages
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
Well first, before you or other leaders at your church start teaching on this topic, you have to know what you believe
Are you convinced of what we offered here today?
Or are you hanging on to another theology that is more culturally convenient but lacks evidence?
You need to rethink how you think theologically about vocational singleness, and you need to study that with other leaders in your church

Then before you ever talk to teens or children about this, you need to teach parents
They will spend many more hours with their children than you will
And even if they never think they’ve had a theological conversation with their kids, we send signals every day about how we think the world works and what we think is most beautiful
Does the average parent in your church believe what we taught today? Would they be able to teach it to their kids?
If not, what do they believe, and what are they teaching their kids, even if unintentionally?

After that, we need to teach students at all ages
We need to weave conversation about lifetime singleness into Bible stories, and we need to tell stories about Paul and Jesus and their vocational singleness
We need to teach teens about this before they go through middle school, so that when romantic and sexual desires hit them, they aren’t prone to running to the idol of romance
We need to prepare graduating teens from your youth group to have a mature theological and practical understanding of marriage and vocational singleness

I would be happy to help your church take these steps






Model it – 
To imagine a future that is good and valued, children must see celibate people thriving and leading
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness must be modeled in our churches

we can only imagine a future for ourselves that we see modeled
we will only imagine that future as good and valuable if it is modeled as being such
so the children in our churches need to see celibate people in our churches thriving
the children in our churches need to see celibate people in places of leadership, upfront, honored






Model it – 
Seek out single people as leaders in your church
Invite single people into your homes
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
First, your church can be intentional about seeking out leaders who are single
Not only do our children need to see single people valued and as leaders, but they have so much to offer the church in their singleness
We need single head pastors, preaching pastors, worship leaders, youth pastors, children’s pastors, bible study leaders, small group leaders, Sunday school leaders, mentors, elders, youth volunteers, etc.

Invite single people into your homes to be part of your families
children need to hear and see this done well so they can imagine it as a good thing for them






Discern it – 
Help teens in your church discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or marriage
Invite them to start asking God, “What is your preference?”
Continuing supporting discernment
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
Help teens in your church discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or marriage

as we teach children and teens how to think theologically about their sexual stewardship and relational vocation, we need to also invite them to discern that
with parents, with mentors, in prayer and Scripture with the Holy Spirit

In addition to the 5 ingredients for discernment we discussed earlier:

invite them to start asking God that question
Invite to ask, “God, would you prefer that I commit to vocational singleness or get married?”
Will God punish us for choosing the lesser path? I don’t see any support in Scripture for that
But are there likely some consequences for following our preference over God’s? probably
I’m confident that we would probably enjoy the most goodness and beauty in this life by following God’s preference

continue supporting discernment in college and beyond
Few teens will know with certainty what God is calling them to before they graduate from high school
Many will continuing discerning late into their 20s, and maybe beyond
We can provide continued support for an individual’s discernment






Support it – 
Large church fellowship
Diverse small groups
Invite singles to couples-only activities
Ask single people what they need and how they want to serve
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
One of the biggest ways we can support celibate people is by helping them find family

First, we can help them experience family in your church
Start with bigger church fellowships where single people can see themselves as part of a big family—I know it’s harder for larger churches or less conventional churches to have these gatherings, but when a single person’s only connection to the church is showing up alone on Sunday and then a rotating door of small groups, they can feel disconnected from something larger and stable

Then, I’d encourage you to have small group or life groups that bring together people from different stages in life. The only thing worse than finding myself in a small group of only single people where every other guy and girl is trying to figure out who they are going to marry is finding myself in a small group full of newly-marrieds and young parents with one child. The loneliness their for the person committed to lifetime singleness is deep. Instead, let’s trying for diverse small groups that include older adults, older couples, widows, divorcees, and families with kids at different stages. We all have things to learn from each other, and we will feel more connected with the church as a whole when your small group actually reflects the average demographics of the church.

I can’t tell you how often single people shoot out texts seeing what people are doing, end up spending the night alone, and then check facebook or Instagram the next day to find some of their married friends got together for couples-only stuff. Sometimes this is intentional exclusion because couples prefer to hang out with other couples. I’m sure I don’t need to point out the problems with that. But more often, couples think single people would be uncomfortable hanging out with a group of couples, so they don’t invite them. Frequently, I’ve learned about a game night or a dinner party or a bible study of friends that I wasn’t invited to, and when I asked around more, they said they didn’t think I’d want to be there. Please, go out of your way to invite single people to things you might consider couples-only.

And last but not least, ask single people what they need. Get a couple of staff together and invite single people to share with you what they need—they’ll have a better idea than you or me. And, ask them how they’d like to get more involved—how they’d like to leverage their singleness to do even more kingdom work.
but as we’ve noted, celibate people need intimate, committed relationships, just like their married friends
They need a family of companions who they know will be there in a decade
The people who will be their for dinner at night, or to hear about their day, or to go on vacation with them

So we can help them find their inner family






Support it – 
Stay with biological family
Join another nuclear family
Create families of vocationally single people
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
Here’s 3 ways celibate people can find family:

First, we can encourage people to stay deeply connected to their biological family. This might look like living with a parent, a sibling, or a cousin, doing rhythms of family with those people, and committing to helping them raise the children in that household.

Or, you might help single people knit themselves into unrelated nuclear families in your church. Maybe people go out of their way to choose celibate people as godparents for their children. Or you invite single people to weekly dinner with your family. Or include them in holidays and vacations. You could even invite single people to live in your home, commit to your family, and help you raise your kids.

Or third, you can help celibate people create families of their own
Help celibate people gather together and commit to being family for each other and doing rhythms of family together.
This is perhaps the least conventional of the options suggested here, and while it might be the most beautiful, it also involved the most logistics.
Churches can help support celibate people in creating these intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it, providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process, and maybe even providing financial support in the early years.
For example, a group of 5 guys and I in Nashville are discerning whether God has called us to start an intentional Christian community for men committed to vocational singleness where we would make commitments to do life together for the rest of our lives. This are the kind of solutions the Church needs

Regardless of which path they take, they need intimate, committed, and permanent family just like everyone else
You’ve noticed that each solution involves living together and commitment
We need to help celibate people find that
Because it is particularly hard for celibate people to find that
And the paths are often unconventional






Celebrate it – 
Find ways to mark and celebrate the commitments and milestones of vocational singles
Thriving in Singleness

[Notes]
Celebrate the lives of celibate people

mother’s day, father’s day, anniversaries, marriages, engagement parties, baptism, baby showers
what for celibates? how do we mark and celebrate their commitment?

if there are commitments, celebrate and anniversary that ceremony – gather friends and family, witness the individual make commitments to vocational singleness to God, and have a party afterward
by putting in leadership and valuing
honoring/commissioning leaders
what about those occasions that are harder without a spouse: birthdays, holidays, vacations, buy a home, 




Application: BELIEVE




Thriving in MOMs
Normalize them – 
They are common and beautiful for those called to them

[Notes]
define

pendulum over past few decades
80s, 90s, and early 00s - everyone needs to marry + pray the gay away
late 00s, 10s - reaction to failures, everyone needs to be celibate

don't pressure people into them: doesn’t work for everyone
what the bible has to say about vocational singleness
don’t discredit: we only hear about the ones that fail

when it’s done well
talk about it before engagement (recognize that it will always be a part of marriage—it returns, work of Satan)
talk about it in marriage
talk about it with other couples
opinions of secular sex therapists: recipe for marital satisfaction and sexual satisfaction is emotional intimacy + commitment (sexual attraction not necessary)

So as a result

talk about them and normalize them
Talk about vocational singleness and MOMs as equally good options for those who experience same-sex attraction. Make sure teens who experience same-sex attraction know God could call them to that. And normalize them—recognize that they exist and will be beautiful for some.




Thriving in MOMs




Teach accurately about marriage – 
Marriage is about emotional intimacy, vulnerability, commitment, and raising children together

[Notes]
talk about what marriage is and isn’t:
If marriage is primarily about sexual attraction and romantic companionship, then perhaps MOMs won’t work
But if it’s about emotional intimacy and vulnerability, commitment, and raising children together, then they can thrive



Thriving in MOMs




Amplify their stories – 
Encourage them to share about the beauty and brokenness of their marriages

[Notes]
Amplify the stories of MOMs in your church, if they are willing to share, and show both the beauty and brokenness
Encourage MOMs in your congregation to share with their pastor and/or small group



Thriving in MOMs




Cultivate vocational singleness – 
Right theology and viable practice of vocational singleness will lead to healthier motivations for entering into MOMs 

[Notes]
cultivate a healthy theology and practice of vocational singleness—
A lot of the friends I have that were in mixed orientation marriages that fell apart or are in a really rough spot, its because the gay person didn’t feel like they had any other option
They didn’t feel like vocational singleness was a viable option
So they told God, “I’ll give this a chance and do my best because it’s my only option, but if this blows up, it’s on you”
much of the pain experienced in MOMs has come from our churches’ idolotry of marriage—and one of the causes of that has been the lack of right theology and practice of vocational singleness to return vocational singleness and marriage to their correct balance



Share





Which of these initiatives do you think would have the most impact at your church?
What barriers will you need to overcome?
93



NEXT


[Notes]
HW



Session 2: BELIEVE
Hear God’s narrative for sexual stewardship and how that is good
Recognize how we have done that poorly
Explore how we can better support vocational singleness and mixed orientation marriages






Training Objectives
Empathize with LGBT+ people and become churches where all people can belong
Offer God’s narrative for sexual stewardship to all and help LGBT+ people take hold of that
Develop a posture and expertise for individual ministry to LGBT+ people






SURVEY

