Sexual Stewardship for All


[Notes]
now let’s go to our topic for today: sexual stewardship for all people
Webinar Key Questions

What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What best paths did God give us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest?
How can we resist sexual temptation, generally?

[Notes]
today, we’re going to explore three questions:
What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What best paths did God give us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest?
How can we resist sexual temptation, generally?
What did God make us for?


[Notes]
so first: What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What did God make us for?

Some think God doesn’t want us to have fun.

Some think they need as much sex/romance as possible with the most attractive people to be most happy.

[Notes]
what does God want us to do with our sexuality?
and what do we want?
some people think God wants us to have no fun
to show our love for him by learning to be content with loneliness and dissatisfaction
to obsess about avoiding sin
and some of us think that what we want is to have as much sex and romance with the most attractive people we can convince to be with us

both of those are off
that's not what God wants
and that's not what we really want
What did God make us for?

We want genuine connection, lasting community, to know and be known.

God wants the same for us! He made each of us for connection in the context of community.

[Notes]
we want genuine connection
we want to not be lonely
we want community
we want love that lasts
we want richer, more meaningful, steady relationship
we want to feel safe
to trust that the people who love us love us well and keep doing so until we die
we want people to go on this life journey with who truly know us
and therefore know how to accompany us well on that journey
and we want to offer the same to others
and enjoy the delight that can only be achieved after decades of that knownness

and God wants those same things for us
our capacity for connection and need for community isn't a test
it's a gift
he made us in his image to enjoy intimacy with Him and each other
and he wants us to enjoy that to the fullest
Made for connection in the context of community

Two best paths: vocational singleness and Christian marriage

Brokenness tempts us to settle for less. But thankfully, God has offered us warning and wisdom.

[Notes]
He first made the world perfectly and imagined all of us connecting with each other in community.
And He gave us two best ways, two different but equally good paths for enjoying connection:
vocational singleness and Christian marriage.

But unfortunately humans have consistently chosen to ignore God's wisdom and trust their own ideas over God's,
leading to brokenness in every part of the world and ourselves.
he knows that in a broken world we will be tempted to settle for less than the fullest life

Thankfully, God looked over our broken world and broken selves,
and He shared with us in the teachings of Jesus and others
warnings about what will cause us harm and to avoid those
plus wisdom about the best ways we can still enjoy connection in community
He gave us direction for how to enjoy our sexuality to the fullest
What is sexual stewardship?

God has given each of us the task of managing our need for community and our capacity for connection.

But our sexualities are just one of many opportunities for stewardship!

[Notes]
Or to put it another way, God has invited us to steward our sexualities

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul admonishes Corinthian Christians for their sexual immorality and calls them to sexual stewardship:

“Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies.” —vv. 19–20

Our bodies were made by and given to us by God.
All have sold their bodies to the slavery of sin with our disobedience.
Yet Christ in his mercy paid the price for that sin, bought us back and chose to dwell in us.
Our bodies are not our own.
They are dwelling places for the Holy Spirit that we’ve been given to steward on this side of heaven
until we receive our perfected resurrected bodies for the New Jerusalem.

So sexual stewardship refers to our God-given task of managing our capacity for friendship, family, romance, and sex and our need for healthy intimacy.
As believers, we all called to steward, to carefully and faithfully manage, multiple aspects of our lives in ways that honor God:
finances, the environment, eating and exercise, sleep, mental health, meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways,
character development, and how we leverage our 9-to-5 jobs for the sake of the kingdom.
Faithfully stewarding each of our sexualities is just one of those tasks, but an important one!

Framing conversation around sexual stewardship is helpful because it zooms out from focusing only on sex and marriage
Too often, a simple “save sex for marriage” mantra suggests that marriage and sex are something that we are owed and can take.
That we have a right to seek our pleasure, as long as we follow the rules.
Instead, a focus on sexual stewardship more broadly includes vocational singleness and suggests that marriage and sex aren’t forgone conclusions.
The phrase “sexual stewardship” properly identifies our sexualities as a gift from God
that we are meant to fearfully and faithfully steward before God based on his wisdom, not based on our pleasure.

How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.
Made for connection in the context of community

[Notes]
So let's start with the basics:
God created you for connection in the context of community

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.

God is a being in community.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a community called the Trinity.
Then when Jesus died on the cross for our sins and resurrected, He made a way for all of us to join the Trinity in God’s family.
You see, God enjoys perfect connection in the Trinity, and while Christians don’t always love God perfectly, He loves us perfectly in the big family of God.
Because we’re made in God’s image, designed to imitate God, we’re also made for connection in communities.




sexuality =

our need to be in community

+ our capacity to connect with other humans
Connection in Community

[Notes]
We call our need to be in community, our capacity to connect with other humans, “sexuality.”

You see, often when people talk about sexuality, they use that word narrowly to only refer to romance and sex.
But there's so much more to our sexuality than just romance and sex.
Even if God calls you to Christian marriage and to enjoy romance and sex in that context,
you'll spend at least the first couple decades of your life unmarried and you might end up spending the last decade or two of your life unmarried, as a widow.
Others of you will never marry.




Even if you get married, most of your connection will be non-romantic and nonsexual
Connection in Community

[Notes]
And even if you get married, your spouse will just be one of many people you'll interact with each day.
You’ll interact with coworkers, friends, any children you have, and other family members.
Do you see what I'm getting at?
Regardless of whether you get married, most of your interactions with other people in your life will be non-romantic and non-sexual,
yet those interactions will still be meaningful connection.
When God made us to be relational creatures,
He intended for most of our connections with each other, most of the times we engage our sexuality, to be non-romantic and non-sexual.




Our need to know others and be known, to give and receive love
We don't need romance/sex to meet our needs for connection
We have physical bodies + intellectual minds + emotional/spiritual soul, so we need connection on each of those levels
Our sexuality is…


[Notes]
So how can we think more broadly about sexuality and our created need and capacity for connection in the context of community?

More generally, our sexuality is our need to know others and be known by others.
to give and receive love
But I'm not just talking about romantic love.
This also includes brotherly and sisterly love. Friend love.

That’s key to understand: we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection.
And the Bible never promises romance or sex to people who follow God.
Let me explain.

One way to think about our needs for connection is to imagine a set of buckets that need to be filled with water.
Each of the buckets represent a kind of connection we need and the water is the connection.
Because we each have a physical body and an intellectual mind and an emotional and spiritual soul,
God designed us to need and have connection on a physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual level.





[Notes]
Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.”


emotional connection = having convos that help you connect w/ gladness, fear, anger, or sadness in you (or others)

[Notes]
When I say emotional connection, I mean having conversations that help you connect with gladness or fear or anger or sadness inside of you, and where you notice some of those same things in others.


spiritual connection = connecting that makes you feel more connected to God (talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, worshiping together)

[Notes]
When I say spiritual connection, I mean connecting in a way that makes you feel more connected to God, by talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, or worshiping together.


physical connection = hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, etc.

[Notes]
When I say physical connection, I mean a hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, and yes, kissing and cuddling and sex.


intellectual connection = exchanging and exploring ideas with another person

[Notes]
When I say intellectual connection, I mean exchanging and exploring ideas with another person.


[Notes]
Now some would argue that there is a fifth bucket labeled “sexual.”
That we all need sexual connection to be whole, and if we don’t get it, we will feel empty.
But I know plenty of people who have never had sex and who are full adults.
They share with me that they have vibrant social lives, rich connection, and a satisfying experience of community.

That’s been true in my own life.
The healthy emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual connection I have experienced in friendships
has been much more satisfying than the broken physical connection I have experienced in the past.
In contrast, I’ve known lots of single people who haven't followed God's wisdom and have had sex outside of marriage.
But despite the beautiful photos they post on instagram
When I talk to them one-on-one, they share with me that they feel empty.
That it's fun in the moment, but they're always living in fear of the person leaving 
or they’re afraid to let the other person really know them because they might break up tomorrow.

so no, we don't need romance or sex to be happy or whole people

Jesus didn’t have sex. 
Paul was committed to celibacy (+many Christian leaders in the past 2000 years)
Matthew 22:30 says there won’t be marriage/sex in heaven.
The Bible doesn’t teach that we need marriage/sex or promise them


[Notes]
Plus, the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or romance to be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Jesus is the example of what it means to be fully human,
so clearly romance and sex aren’t necessary to be fully human.

Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the early leaders in the Church were celibate.
And in Matthew 22:30, Jesus suggests that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex
because the non-romantic, non-sexual ways we'll connect with God and each other will be 1000 times better than any romance or sex in this life



[Notes]
Instead, there are four connection buckets. Emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual.
God provides a good chunk of our spiritual connection.
Those who are married will partially fill each of those buckets with the connection they experience in their marriage.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t fill your connection buckets.
You will still need emotional connection, intellectual connection, physical connection, and spiritual connection from friendship.

Webinar Key Questions

What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What best paths did God give us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest?
How can we resist sexual temptation, generally?

[Notes]
okay, so we’ve described what God made us for as sexual beings
next, let’s explore the best paths God has given us to enjoy our sexualities to the fullest!
What best paths did God provide?


[Notes]
God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?

God designed two best ways/vocations for Christians to enjoy connection in the context of community:
Vocational Singleness
Christian marriage
*How* can we connect in community?

[Notes]
In short, God has designed two paths for Christians to do that,
two vocations
and He wants to give some of us the gift to walk down one of those paths and others the gift to walk down the other path:
Vocational singleness and Christian marriage
both of these are particular ways adult Christians can enjoy connection in the context of community

This is *THE* key lever of God-honoring and life-giving sexual stewardship
If you want the most satisfying connection in community for a lifetime
Then accept the gift that God wants to give you
And live fully into God’s design for the vocation He gave you

The key to sexual stewardship isn’t focusing on what we’re supposed to say “no” to
More often than not, when I meet lonely, disconnected, relationally wounded people
It’s because there are ways they could more fully say “yes” to God’s calling for their lives
And His design for that vocation


Why “vocation”?

A Christian vocation is a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision.

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation?
Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 
Why “vocation”?

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom.

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

How are Christians called to steward their sexuality?

[Notes]
As this diagram depicts, we’re all first called to a period of temporary singleness
during which we discern whether we’re called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage

As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of a prolonged temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

I want to sit here a second
These distinctions were mind-blowing for me when I first saw them in Scripture

None of us are on a default path
Not supposed to just take what we want
Shouldn’t continue in the limbo of uncommitted singleness
Two options
Both equally good and normal but one more common
Need to ask God which He wants me to do
I won’t get the gift from God to do either well until I step out of temporary singleness and COMMIT
Temporary Singleness


[Notes]
So where do we start?
Well, we’re are all first called to a temporary period of abstinent singleness
in which we enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ in non-sexual, non-romantic companionship.

A period of temporary singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong vocational singleness nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
We should all learn to do this well

This is a calling to neither vocational singleness nor marriage
—defining our default calling in the negative is not sufficient but it is informative—
we are not yet called to vocational singleness or to marriage. 

We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires,
want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 

We should all submit our sexuality to God, study what the Scriptures have to say about sexual stewardship,
and discern with God and spiritual mentors in our lives whether we are called to vocational singleness or marriage.

Why distinguish between temporary and vocational singleness?
singleness we’re born into + waiting for marriage vs. committed + lifetime for the single-minded kingdom work
uncommitted singles feel shallowly rooted in kingdom work and spiritual family
Jesus + Paul commend one, not the other
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
But why distinguish between temporary singleness and vocational singleness?

Well, there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children
vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage
vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

But I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.

Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage Christians to consider kingdom singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
—they’re commending committed, lifetime singleness.

In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.
So if someone is in temporary singleness, without the gift of singleness, and struggling, perhaps part of the difficult is that they haven’t receive the gift yet

the Church has consistently taught that it is NOT God’s intention for Christians to continue in temporary for a lifetime
For the vast majority, it is better to settle down into vocational singleness or marriage
That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness.
For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage,
continuing into their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life.
While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.
 



Discernment


[Notes]
Okay, so there’s a difference between temporary and vocational singleness
I’ve got a sense of how to do temporary singleness well
But why should I discern? And how do I discern?

we did a whole webinar on this earlier in 2023
but I’ll briefly review today



Why should everyone discern?

Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen
Why discern?

[Notes]
Everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference

Why?
because
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

In some ways, our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

At this point, you might point out that in Matt 19:12, Jesus speaks of “choosing” to live like a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom?
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?

Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into vocational singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.

Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.

We should also discern God’s calling, ask God to show us why that is best for us, be patient for our heart to grow to desire God’s best for us,
and then choose to accept God’s gift!


A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness.
Why discern?

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.

Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.
We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.

In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come naturally to us.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.

So we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness

speaking of which
Still others might say, “Well, doesn’t 1 Corinthians 7:9 say that if you find abstinence difficult, you’re called to marriage?”

That’s a common interpretation
It’s actually more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
“Discernment” in the Bible?

Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.

[Notes]
Now, admittedly, is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no

but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church,
and the only two Protestant theologians to offer systematic theologies of celibacy: Max Thurian and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift,
if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly

how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?

DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of singleness or a vocational of marriage.
And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference




Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
How to Discern

[Notes]
what, then, does it look like to ask God this question?
to give God a chance?
to discern?

Here’s 5 sugg estions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.



Vocational Singleness


[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those

“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
We’ve already established that God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
Plus, the early Church unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be teaching about a permanent commitment to celibate singleness
The disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples, unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy, instead of waiting for marriage.
We’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus. 

“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship

“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.

But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.

Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

How can we thrive in vocational singleness?
voluntarily commit in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
In light of this, how can we do vocational singleness well if we’re called to it?
voluntarily commit to it in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling with vocational singleness
if you’re walking out longterm singleness involuntarily
or haven’t taken the time to discern God’s calling
or haven’t made an intentional, lifelong commitment
or aren’t using your vocational singleness to serve the poor and need in some meaningful way
or are trying to do vocational singleness alone or with a revolving door of roommates and church family
then perhaps you’ll find thriving by leaning into one of those
Christian Marriage


[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

Christian marriage…

Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…

Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.

In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce,
giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention.

Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence,
but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception,
and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception.

Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce.

Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage
or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine
(1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman…

God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman

God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman
and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage.

In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband.

Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)


Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, & life-giving to remind us that
God will never abandon us
there is beautiful differentness in the Trinity & between Jesus+Church
the Trinity & Jesus+Church are life-sustaining
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
in particular, it's important that Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, and life-giving.

Christian marriages are supposed to be for a lifetime. There are very few grounds for Biblical divorce and remarriage.
This faithfulness in Christian marriage displays the gospel because it remind us that God will never abandon us.

Christian marriages are supposed to be complimentary. The complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically in Christian marriage
displays the gospel by pointing back to the different-ness in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

And Christian marriage are supposed to be a space for raising children,
pointing us back to the life-giving nature of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church.

How can we thrive in Christian marriage?
Commit intentionally after a period of discernment
Seen as a gift/calling from God to labor
Recognize the gospel nature + potential to testify to Christ’s love
Take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
Revere lifetime nature
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
In light of this, how can couples thrive in Christian marriage?
make sure your marriage is entered into intentionally after a period of discernment
see your marriage as a gift and calling from God to labor for the sake of the kingdom
recognize the gospel nature of your Christian marriage and potential to testify to Christ’s love
take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
recognize that divorce in God’s eye is almost never an option (so dig deep)

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling in your Christian marriage
taking your marriage for granted as something the universe owes you
seeing your marriage as ordinary and for your own happiness
believing that a call to Christian marriage is less sacrificial or less kingdom-focused than celibacy
stewarding the marriage to maximize your comfort instead of your kingdom impact
resisting the difficult work of maintaining the marriage by allowing yourself to consider divorce
Why follow God’s wisdom?


[Notes]
admittedly, these are high standards for sexual stewardship
this is culturally inconvenient wisdom
so why follow it?


If a god exists, he’s the God of the Bible, and that God knows what is best for us—we’d be fools not to follow God’s wisdom

God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life
Why follow God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
God seems to have a lot of rules for how we should seek out intimacy and family.
Why follow God’s wisdom about intimacy and family?

If we believe that a god exists, if we believe that god is the God of the Bible, and if we believe that God knows what is best for us
—if we really believe all of those things, we would be fools not to follow God’s wisdom.

If Lebron James was your basketball coach and you ignored his advice about how to become a better basketball player, you’d be a fool!
How much better advice does God have about the ways to enjoy the most goodness and beauty and meaning in this life? Trust Him!

We have been designed, by God, for specific purposes. That matters.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we allow ourselves to live in ways we weren’t designed to, we get hurt.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we use romance, marriage, and sex contrary to God’s design, it brings pain to our lives.

If God’s wisdom is best for us, following His teachings will save us from unnecessary pain of figuring out the best paths through trial and error.
Plus, God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life.

Webinar Key Questions

What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What best paths did God give us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest?
How can we resist sexual temptation, generally?

[Notes]
okay, so we’ve examined what God made us for and the best paths He gave us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest
now let’s explore good general wisdom for resisting sexual temptation
How can we resist temptation?


[Notes]
and there’s some good news:
temptation is predictable

False hope of easy connection/comfort
Particularly when we’re lacking healthy connection with others
And when we’re overwhelmed with sadness, fear, or anger
Leading to a habit almost automatic sin
Temptation is predictable

[Notes]
the Enemy is predictable
He uses the same tricks over and over again
he offers us false hope
particularly when we're burdened by painful emotions like sadness, fear and anger
or we're lonely or tired
and he lies to us
he reminds us how God's wisdom can be hard work
and he tempts us to ignore God's wisdom
and instead suggests that we take some shortcuts to make ourselves feel better
that there's easier ways to deal with the pain
that we can just fantasize about someone sexually to make us feel better
or look at sexual videos
or cross sexual boundaries with other people
the Enemy tells us that those things will make us feel better and that they won't hurt anyone, including ourselves
but that's a mirage

instead, we find the opposite is true
we don't experience lasting relief or real connection
instead we experience more pain
more sadness, fear, and anger
more loneliness
more exhaustion
the Enemy's shortcuts don't work in the long-term
and they rarely work in the short-term

but we keep on falling for the same lies
why?

because we keep getting caught in a vulnerable position
because we're got sadness, fear, anger, loneliness, and exhaustion that we haven't addressed in health ways
so we're easy targets for the Enemy

and because the Enemy gets us in the habit of going to them, to the point where it feels automatic
it feels like we're not even choosing anymore
He's so persistent to tempt us with the same things over and over again
he trains us, like a pet, to quickly go to the destructive bandaids
to the cheap substitutes
and it becomes automatic
if that goes on for long enough, ”sexual addiction” may best describe your experience
if that’s the case, the general wisdom I offer here isn’t going to be enough
you’re going to need a certified sex addiction therapist
or to join a sex addiction recovery / 12-step group
or both




The solution: ask the Holy Spirit to heal you resist sexual temptation by
Connecting with friends
Feeling your feelings
Breaking habits of sin
Resisting temptation

[Notes]
the solution?
to run to Jesus and to your friends and ask for a hug, a conversation, help
God gave us the Holy Spirit and each other to lean on
You can ask the Holy Spirit to help you resist sexual temptations by connecting with friends, feel your feelings, and breaking habits of sin


When our connection buckets are empty, it’s more difficult to resist temptation.

If we’re intentional about connecting in healthy ways, temptations are easier to resist.
#1 Connect with friends

[Notes]
First, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by connecting with friends
Have you noticed that when we aren’t filling out connection needs buckets in healthy ways
That broken parts of our soul and mind tend to reach out for destructive and unsatisfying shortcuts?
When you ignore your need for community and connection and try to go at it alone,
you end up making unwise decisions later.
Lust, masturbation, pornography, and crossing boundaries with other people all become more difficult to resist.

This has certainly been true in my life. For a long time, I was tired of needing people in my life
I'd been hurt by people who said I was their friend and said I could depend on them
But then they abandoned me or later rejected me
So for a season, I didn't want any close friends. I just wanted to be okay being alone.
But during that time, I found temptations to look at pornography and cross physical intimacy boundaries much more difficult to resist.
It was almost like my loneliness, the emptiness of my connection needs buckets,
was giving those temptations more power. Was fueling them.
It wasn't until I started reaching out to friends again and connecting with them in healthy ways, 
that I found greater strength to resist temptations.
But if we’re intentional about filling our connection needs buckets in healthy ways with friends, it’s take power away from the Enemy’s temptations and makes them easier to resist.

Invest in a few close friends
Share about your fears, pains, hopes, dreams
Ask them for help when you’re in pain and when you’re glad
Connect about Jesus & give each other hugs
#1 Connect with friends

[Notes]
so first, connect with friends

Invest in a couple of close friends
I don't think there's anything you really need that you couldn't get reliably from a couple of good friends
let your friends get to know the real you
share with them your fears and pains
and your hopes and dreams
when you're feeling sad or angry or afraid, tell them, and ask them to listen and comfort you
when you're happy about something, tell them so they can celebrate with you!
whatever big ideas you're wrestling with and challenging problems,
share those with your friends and invite them to help you make sense of them
read the Bible and pray and worship Jesus together
give each other hugs, don't be afraid to sit close to each other on the couch, lean your head on their shoulder

Reduce the power of temptation by caring for your painful emotions instead of ignoring them
Fear needs you to see risk & think wisely
Anger needs you to see injustice & seek justice
Sadness needs you to see loos & mourn it
#2 Feel your feelings

[Notes]
Second, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by feeling your feelings
it might seem counterintuitive, but the best way to resist sexual temptation
the best defense against sexual sin
is listening to and caring for our emotions

the key emotions are gladness, sadness, fear, and anger
particularly when you feel one of those three painful emotions, could I encourage you to learn from them instead of ignoring them?

when you're scared, your body is trying to tell you that there's actually something that involves risk in your life
that you might get hurt
and your body is trying to make sure that you've thought wisely about that risk and prepared for the future

when you're angry, that's often because there's something unjust, something unfair in the world around you
and your body wants you to seek justice in some way, or at least recognize for yourself that it isn't fair

when you're sad, it's because you've lost something small or big, and your body needs for you to grieve
for you to mourn
for you to spend time giving yourself permission to be sad about the loss


Connecting with feelings is the only way to get beyond them.

But you don’t have to connect with your feelings alone. Ask friends for help & resist temptation easier!
#2 Feel your feelings

[Notes]
with each of these, the solution is rarely about doing something quickly to make the emotion go away
it's about giving yourself time and space to feel your feelings
connecting with them is the only way for them to get out

but you don't have to do it alone
and sometimes it's too scary to do alone
that's why it's important to lean on friends
to share when them when you're feeling sadness, fear, or anger
to ask them to listen
to ask questions
and to give you a hug

if we do that, we have much less of a need for the destructive shortcuts that the enemy suggests
we've taken care of ourselves in healthy ways, so lust and porn and crossing boundaries are less tempting
its easier to see how those won't actually help us, and then to resist them

After connecting with others and your emotions, try to interrupt patterns of sin.

Ask friends to add software/blockers to devices. Ask a trusted friend to hold you accountable and check-in often.
#3 Break habits of sin

[Notes]
And third, take the power out of the Enemy’s temptations by breaking habits of sin

Whether it’s lust, masturbation, porn, or crossing sexual boundaries with someone,
Remember how I shared about how my sexual sin felt automatic for a season
Like I wasn’t even choosing it anymore, but it was just happening?
And I couldn’t stop?

Well, after you connect with friends in healthy ways and connect with your feelings
You can focus on breaking what feel like automatic patterns of sexual sin

An easy way to break the habit of porn is to ask a friend to help you put software or some kind of blocks on your devices to keep you from being able to access porn

If you’ve been crossing sexual boundaries with someone, maybe you could ask a trusted friend to help you come up with better boundaries

And a final way you can try to break the habit of any of these sexual sins is by asking someone you trust for help holding you accountable.
Someone to check in with you regularly about how you're doing with those.
Sometimes just knowing that someone will ask is enough to give you a little more strength to say "no"
Webinar Key Questions

What did God make us for as sexual beings?
What best paths did God give us to enjoy sexuality to the fullest?
How can we resist sexual temptation, generally?
