Porn & Sexual Addiction
SNL
SEX & LIES
challenging common beliefs
about sex and intimacy

[Notes]
introduce event

what do we mean by SSA. why not say gay? why not say sexual minorities?
no perfect term
only describes experience—not identity or expression

Pieter
personal experience
attractions
homosexual activity is sin
no promise of change
peace, meaning, and intimacy
committed my life to coming alongside by brothers and sisters who experience same-sex attraction so they don’t have to navigate life alone, and educating my brothers and sisters who don’t experience so that they can love people like me better
my hope is tonight can be a step in that direction

Cyrus
my story different
share more later
conversation effects more of us than we understand
usually approach this as a problem to be fixed
people on all sides that need to be loved
historically, the way we have approached this conversation has created more division
The suicide rate, the hate crime rate, the distaste of the LGBT community for the church, regardless of what you believe about homosexuality, Christ has a heart to step into these moments. We can’t let our inability to reconcile our differences keep us from pursuing Christ centered friendships with all people and Jesus’ heart for the community.
 
Good conversations about theology is a means, not the end
The end is to love better
Polarization barrier to better conversation
Remove those barriers and image of God will show through

Pieter
start conversations, but by no means exhaustive
encourage you to have more conversation with each other and with either of us afterward

The US porn industry has revenues of more than $5 billion every year.
79% of 18-30 year old men and 76% of 18-30 year old women view pornography at least once a month 
55% of married men and 25% of married women view pornography at least once a month
56% of divorces involve one party having an obsessive interest in pornographic websites 
64% of Christian men and 15% of Christian women view pornography at least once a month
Assumptions
Anyone can have absolute freedom if he/she tries hard enough

or

Absolute freedom is impossible, so there’s no point in trying
Discussion
Have you ever held or currently hold either of these beliefs?
How have these beliefs created barriers?
Where have you heard these?
Have they been true?
What are the problems with each?
Alternative
Expect progress, not perfection
Every person’s progress will look different

why do we want it?how can we fight it?
Why do we want it?
Created for intimacy and to feel

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways or honor our feelings

Escape from or numb painful emotions
Attempt ( to meet to unmet intimacy needs

Why not just stop?
Sexual Addiction
brain develops appetite for, takes us to it, builds tolerance to it
Why not just stop?
Shame Cycle
Sad
Angry
Mad
Escape
Numb
Escape
Numb
Discussion
SOCIETY
People are born gay
No one should have to be single
Being gay but not acting on it is unhealthy suppression
Can you wholly accept or reject these statements? If not, what makes you hesitate?
19

[Notes]
Pieter
finding middle ground
26

[Notes]
Cyrus

Both sides seem to have something to offer, but not satisfied with either extreme
But doesn’t seem like we are offered any alternatives
We then tend to ignore the topic or feel trapped by one side or the other
 
We want to share with you at least one position in the middle
Not the only place in the middle
But we think it’s a good place

Share story

Pieter
found myself stuck
back to the drawing board
what was I created for?
what is most good?
personal experience, biblical study, graduate counseling training, theological education, other peoples’ stories
makes the most sense for me (consistent and unifying, but also challenging of not just me but everyone)
Alternatives
Neither born gay nor chose it
A preponderance of Biblical evidence points to homosexual activity being a sin
Experiencing SSA is not a sin, and probably won’t go away
All people could be called out of singleness into marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Can meet intimacy needs as single person in intimate friendship with others
Source of spiritual growth, meaning, identity, and belonging
38

[Notes]
Thorn in Paul’s side
could discuss any one of these for the rest of our time
can’t give all of them justice
more conversation among yourselves and with us

research (P)

what bible does and doesn’t say (C)
every time same-sex sexual activity mentioned, names as a sin
bible only specifies marriage as being between one man and one woman
Other perspectives: never addresses loving, monogamous same-sex marriage
bible written to a people in a time, place, and culture

3. P

4. C
2 sides: church says should marry, society says should never -> could

5. P
definition and buckets

6. C
response to any cross to bear
Discussion
If neither born gay nor choose it, how does that impact the way you approach friends who are sexual minorities?
If the Bible can’t provide an absolutely certain answer and those who experience SSA can’t expect their SSA to change, what does a life of meaning and joy look like?
In what ways have you found spiritual growth, meaning, identity, and belonging in your response to the unfairness and brokenness of this world?
47

[Notes]
C
P
C
Is it better?
Does your community promise marriage as the answer to loneliness?
Would single adults be able to meet their intimacy needs in meaningful friendship at your church?
Does your church denounce homosexuality but look the other way when it comes to divorce?
Does your church invite sinners of all kinds to share about their experience without shame or judgment?

[Notes]
P. 

And even then, in a world of theologians and political pundits, 
what people really respond to is what they experience. 
Is what we are offering really better?
Discussion
Based on your answers to those questions, does the Church offer something better? If not, what could better look like? What can we do about this? Feel free to focus on one question or consider all of them as a whole.
52
Take-away’s
Continue conversation
Transform the Church
Intimacy Wholeness Group

[Notes]
C. what we offer isn’t better yet
time would be better spent building something better than arguing about theology

encourage you to continue conversation with us and amongst yourselves about how to think well and love well

P. challenge you as the “movers and shakers” of tomorrow
go back to our churches and transform them
to think better, love better, and offer something better

P. One way we are trying to do that Support group
what isn’t
what is
women
share with others
have conversation
