Porn & Sexual Addiction
SNL
SEX & LIES
challenging common beliefs
about sex and intimacy

[Notes]
Cyrus

intro

The church doesn’t really offer a useful solution, and in part it is because the Church doesn’t understand the problem 

talk about both of our struggles with pornography and/or sexual addiction

start conversations, but by no means exhaustive
encourage you to have more conversation with each other and with either of us afterward

The US porn industry has revenues of more than $5 billion every year.

[Notes]
Pieter

want to recognize that we are doing this in mixed company
for many women here you personally struggle with pornography
also for many, you have a lot of fear and hurt around this
fear that a guy you date or marry will have a problem with this
and hurt when a guy you are dating reveals that he still struggles with this

first, clarify that if a guy you are dating struggles with pornography, it’s not because you are not enough
it says NOTHING about how beautiful or desirable you are or how meaningful your relationship is
you’ll see more later that it has everything to do with a his brokenness

most guys you date will have had a problem with this at some time
and many will continue to have a problem, even in marriage
worst thing you can do is let your fear discourage him from being honest
if it’s something he struggles with, the best thing for both of you will be honesty and seeking the wisdom of others

frat 
rage 
sex 
alcohol and drug 

sorority 
gossip 
manipulation 
mean 
caddy 
comparing 
excessive dependence 

work stress better correlated with porn use than marriage stress 


79% of 18-30 year old men and 76% of 18-30 year old women view pornographyat least once a month. 
55% of married men and 25% of married women view pornography at least once a month.
56% of divorces involve one party having an obsessive interest in pornographic websites. 
64% of Christian men and 15% of Christian women view pornography at least once a month.
Assumptions
Absolute freedom is impossible, so there’s no point in trying
Absolute freedom is impossible, so there’s no point in trying
or

[Notes]
Cyrus

define absolute freedom
God will provide everything I need to never sin in this area of my life again

we often hear this at church. some people have had a fairly simple and easy battle with temptation and have experienced permanent victory through community and accountability. others who hold this have tried lots of different strategies but cannot find any lasting victory to pornography and live in a lot of shame because they believe they have failed.

many have given up. “if I can’t be completely free of this, I don’t want to work at it. progress is not enough. I’ll just enjoy it.

Discussion
Are there any trends on your spectrum or between the spectra in your group?

In what other areas of your life do you expect absolute freedom?

In the areas of your life where you don’t expect absolute freedom, do you still work toward better?

[Notes]
Cyrus

poll the group
self evaluabtion (where does your family, church going up, friends today, you lie on spectrum)
then can selectively share with the group

answer and discuss

Alternative
Expect progress, not perfection

Every person’s progress will look different


[Notes]
Pieter

neither seem to satisfy
here’s what we think is a good alternative

We may not all achieve absolute freedom in this lifetime, but we are all promised that our sanctification continues and that God will do His part.
We can all at least expect progress
For some, progress will look like going from watching pornography every day to once a week and then once a month and then once a year and finally reaching what seems like permanent victory, despite continued temptation.
For others, progress will continue, but they may only reach reducing their pornography use to once a week or once a month or once a year.


Discussion
What does Scripture promise about the process of sanctification: being made holy and like Christ?

Does anyone’s sanctification look the same?

Does our level of sanctification impact God’s view of us?

[Notes]
Pieter
why do we want it?how can we fight it?

[Notes]
cyrus

why is it so difficult
what can we do about it
why do we want it?
Created for intimacy and to feel

But if we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways or let ourselves feel our feelings…

Turn to porn
To Escape from or numb painful emotions
(Unsatisfying) shortcut to meet unmet intimacy needs

[Notes]
cyrus

feel = have emotional reactions to the world
what does honor mean?
imagine honoring a guest in your home
welcome, create space, give time

symptom: porn
wound: unmet intimacy needs and unfelt feelings
so energy best spent on healing the wound
why not just stop?
Sexual Addiction

brain develops appetite for, takes us to, builds tolerance to porn

[Notes]
pieter

because our brain is addicted to porn and organsm with porn
compare the dopamine levels released (the simplest measure of the biological pleasure experienced) between porn, normal sex, cocaine, nicotine, morphine, food, and meth
repeated dopamine flood pleasure center of brain rewires the brain to have an appetite for porn
our brain automatically sends us to porn when we have painful emotions or when we feel lonely
and once we are a few clicks away, the chemicals in our body overpower the parts of our brain responsible for logic and reason
and our brain develops a tolerance to poor so that we need more quantity and extreme content to get same experience

Why not just stop?
Shame Cycle
Sad
Angry
Mad
Escape
Numb
SHAME
Feel



[Notes]
pieter

we get stuck in the shame cycle
the only way to get out is to feel our feelings
Discussion
Knowing why we want porn and why it’s difficult to stop, why does the solution of praying when a temptation arises seem to fall short?

How does the culture in the Church around meaningful relationships and feelings impact our fight against porn?

[Notes]
cyrus

after hearing this, the first thought that comes to my mind is: if this is how it works, no wonder the way my church taught me to “fight” porn didn’t work
church I grew up in didn’t encourage meaningful relationships or feeling feelings
creating unmet intimacy needs and a pressure cooker of feelings
the traditional response is pray when temptations arrive seems lacking
How do we stop it?
Don’t fight alone

Meet your intimacy needs and feel

Have reasonable expectations

[Notes]
cyrus

shame from being seen and shame from not being able to do it alone
receive accountability from people, and useful filtering and accountability tools out there

pieter

meet needs in healthy ways and talk about our feelings
as we’ve seen, a prayer the moments before is usually too late
the opportunity to prevent was 6 hours before
ex) imagine my roommate that watches porn at 10 PM
started with a stressful day at work with coworkers he barely knows
when he gets home, just wants to not feel stressed, so goes to Netflix or video games or facebook
these are the gateway drugs for porn
they only postpone feelings
then he gets to 10 pm, feelings are pent up, and hasn’t connected with anyone
instead, if he had come home, talked to roommate, spent quality time, and let himself feel feelings, no need for porn

cyrus

reasonable expectations
don’t demand from God or promise yourself or others
but it is reasonable to hope
progress not perfection
God hurts with us
Discussion
Does this strategy seem effective?

How can you share these and continue conversations with your friends?

[Notes]
pieter
