
the archdiocese of st. louis 
equip &


[Notes]
thanks for being willing to be part of these conversations
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
A little about Equip

We’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 21,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to historic sexual ethics
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to historic sexual ethics
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either
vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments

[Notes]
here’s how we’re going to spend our time over the next two days (as time allows)
my story

[Notes]
I wanted to start by sharing some of my story
because it’s been a journey to get to where I am today
submitting my brokenness to God and stewarding my sexuality according to His wisdom

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family

what’s your story?

[Notes]
each of us are bringing stories into this work
maybe it isn’t your personal story of experiencing same-sex attraction
but you’ve ministered to LGBT+ people
maybe you’ve got LGBT+ people in your immediate or extended families
what are the stories you’re bringing into this work
of God’s love and wisdom for LGBT+ people
and the challenge we as Christians face attempting to embody that?
2 anchor points

[Notes]
I want to speak briefly to two question that I think would be helpful anchors for our brainstorming
What do LGBT+ people and “allies” hear?

Conflation, lack of clarity, sloppiness, fear, silence, hate, double standards, and a lack of vision or hope or support—leading to confusion, fear, victim mentality, loss of faith, and hopelessness.

[Notes]
First: Despite our intentions to teach the Scriptures and preach the gospel with compassion, what do LGBT+ people often hear?
How do they often interpret our actions and words differently than we expect?

sloppy convo conflating orientation, identity, and behavior (and conflate them themselves)

lack of clarity about whether God made them that way (and are confused)

sloppy use of "change" and "healing” (leading to false hope and loss of faith)

scared to talk about LGBT+ topics in empathetic ways, silence on coming out day, pride month, tragedies (and believe we don’t see them or care)

use words/phrases like ”love the sinner, hate the sin”
“homosexuals”
”sexual preference”
“gay agenda”
failure to confess sins of the church
failure to practice term-mirroring
culture war about nuclear family, grooming, trans stuff (believe we hate them)

emphasis on nuclear family--that they know they're left out of (they think they have to be alone to make Jesus happy, and we’re condemning them to that)

leaning on clobber passages instead of sexual stewardship for all
Marriage is about commitment and companionship (double standard – divorece/remarriage)
A loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage (need better idea of love)
don’t invite straight people to consider lifetime non-religious life celibacy
gay sin treated as worse than straight sin
dont see straight people enduring difficult things
(all leading to victim mentality)

not actually a place where they could thrive in celibacy or MOM
no clarity of vision for thriving
Keys to effective, winsome, and biblical discipleship

Confess the sins of Christians
Raise the bar for sexual stewardship
Offer clarity as charity
Commit to doing better (and point to early positive results)
Offer family+mission like nowhere else

[Notes]
Second, and in contrast, if a priest or parent is discipling someone who experiencing same-sex attraction or gender incongruence, what are the keys to effective and winsome biblical discipleship?

confess sins of the church
You don’t have to apologize for (or abandon) a historic sexual ethic
And my hunch is that most of you have loved the gay people in your life well
You personally don't have anything to confess
But Nehemiah 9 and Ezra 9 make clear that it is good for the people of God to recognize and confess the collective sins of the Church
So I encourage you confess the ways Christians in the past were complicit in hate crimes and discrimination
taught that merely experiencing same-sex attraction was a sin
policed what words that LGBT+ people use to describe themselves
barred from leadership in church even if they were celibate
and propagated ex-gay theology that led millions of LGBT+ people to lose their life or faith
when you talk to non-straight or straight people who are skeptical of a historic sexual ethic, you can confess those things


this also means you shouldn’t concede that historic sexual ethics are unhealthy
the reality is, there's scientific evidence to prove that historic sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide
it actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.

On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
it often leads to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
Most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:
At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
hey wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 
Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been Side A for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.
Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

That is a death of another kind.

Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?
Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
But then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.
So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help children in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!


offer clarity as charity
being unclear about your church's convictions on sexual ethics
finding cute ways to avoid answering questions
putting out vibes that your church might hold a revisionist sexual ethic
only for them to later learn that you hold a historic sexual ethic
when a Christian in a same-sex relationship tries to sign up to lead a bible study or lead worship
just leads to a painful bait-and-switch experience of LGBT+ people
and a sense of betrayal that they will associate with Jesus
when you intentionally or accidentally walk LGBT+ people into a bait-and-switch
you are poisoning the gospel
instead, be honest and clear about your church's convictions
now, you can still find careful ways to share about God's wisdom
but don't make it difficult for people to figure out what you believe

recognize double standard - and raise the bar
Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.
But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, churches can invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.
This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance,
having sex outside of marriage, making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography,
failing to consider a call to vocational singleness, unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.

These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God’s inconvenient wisdom
and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.

eventually, we need to give answers that actually make sense (once we’ve confessed and raised the bar)
we need to actually take the time to explore and answer the following questions in theologically accurate and intellectually rigorous ways:
how did my same-sex attractions develop? why? did God intend for me to be gay?
is there a way to change my sexual orientation?
can I truly be happy and fulfilled without romance or sex?
are same-sex attractions broken? a sin?
what should LGBT+ people do with gay culture, identity, etc.?
is God's wisdom fair?
how do I know what God's wisdom is?
do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

while recognizing that God’s wisdom will seem foolish to thought who aren’t following him yet
don’t argue about sexual ethics if your disagreements are really about more fundamental questions
Do they believe God exists?
Do they believe that God knows what’s best for them better than they do?
Do they believe we come to know that God’s best for us by reading the Scriptures with the Church historic?
If they answer ”no” to any of those questions, then don’t get distracted by emotionally-loaded convo about sexual ethics
Of course they disagree with you
but that’s merely a downstream effect of your more fundamental disagreement
instead of arguing about controversial topics
back up and talk about the more fundamental but less emotionally-loaded questions

commit to doing better
particularly by making sure that LGBT+ Christians who already agree with Church teaching are actually thriving
how?
by helping them mourn the wounds of the closet
most of them will have spent 5 years or more making sense of their sexuality when they were teens
and during that time in the closet, the Enemy tortured them
the closet is a trauma
and it leads to loneliness, shame, anxiety, depression, unhealthy coping mechanisms,
addiction suicidality, doubt in God's wisdom, doubt in God's goodness,
and doubt in God's existence that haunt gay people for the rest of their life
help them take an inventory of lingering wounds of the closet
mourn that trauma
and help them connection with professional counseling to address vestiges of that trauma

make sure you're seeking out the training and expertise you need
to be able to offer them pastoral care around their challenges and questions
related to faith and sexuality

and most importantly, make sure gay Christians who feel called to vocational singleness
can find real, lifelong, lived-in human family
too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone

Instead, our churches can celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

and then help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.
The first act of the Church was to gather celibate women
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.

plus, once you’ve been taking those steps for years or decades, you’ll have positive results to point to!

Offer family and mission like nowhere else
Why would an LGBT+ person ever want to go to a church that affirms a historic sexual ethic?
Well, why would anyone who disagrees with some of the moral teachings of your church choose to attend anyway?
Why would anyone want to be a part of a church that calls him or her to inconvenient stewardship of any kind? 
That question isn't unique to LGBT+ people or sexual ethics for gay people.

You must offer something compelling:
family in the Body of Christ and an opportunity to serve their community
better than gay people can find anywhere else.
Your church must offer something so compelling and so beautiful
that individuals will want to continue to be a part of your church despite other aspects they strongly disagree with.

We must invite them to be a part of a community of believers
that is more satisfying than can be found anywhere else
and invite them to come on mission with us to redeem the world.
We must have a posture of trusting and being patient with the Holy Spirit
to reveal what is true to all of us according to His timing.
We can continue to nurture a meaningful relationship with people
and support them in seeking greater goodness where they’ve asked for help.

In the meantime, we can get busy helping our church offer something truly better!
To be frank, if your church isn’t offering anything better to LGBT+ people yet,
why would that person ever want to steward his or her sexuality differently?
Start by calling straight Christians to meaningful, life-giving, and often inconvenient sexual stewardship
and making your church a place where celibate Christians (gay or straight) can find meaningful community.


Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
where are we going?
Where are we going?

Identify the need, cast vision, and outline strategy
Gather, write, review, and improve content
Brainstorm gaps and discuss challenges
Prepare supporting materials
Preview the training
Deliver, assess, and adjust

[Notes]
today we're brainstorming and syncing on needs + vision + strategy
I'll compile notes from this meeting and ask you to review+comment

once we have clarity about needs, vision, strategy
(including audience + content + philosophy/delivery + shared language/understanding)
THEN we can start gathering content pieces
creating the content we need to fill in the gaps
reviewing that work
commenting and improving

we’ll probably gather again in-person to to brainstorm gaps or discuss difficult points

then we’ll put together the supporting materials we’ll need:
slide deck, teaching notes, handouts, supporting documents/resources

next we’ll preview the training for those who need a first look

and finally we’ll deliver the training, assess it’s impact, and plan accordingly for the next best step!
who is our audience?

[Notes]
for the rest of our time together, I’m going to ask a lot of questions
for most of these, there aren’t right answer
this isn’t about discovering the right answers
it’s about collecting the wisdom and insight that’s already in this room
sometimes you’ll have a lot to say
other times, there might not be much you have to add
both are okay
Who is our audience?

Parishioners, parents, and students are our ultimate audience.
What describes them? What do they believe/assume?
What are their backgrounds?
What’s their level of religiosity?
Socioeconomic status? Marital status?
Other relevant lifestyle or demographic characteristics? 

[Notes]
Parishioners, parents, and students are our ultimate audience.
What describes them?

What do they believe/assume?
What are their backgrounds?
What’s their level of religiosity?
Socioeconomic status? Marital status?
Other relevant lifestyle or demographic characteristics? 

WHY DO THIS?
we always need to have the audience in mind
the people we are ministering to

Who is our audience?

But first, we’re equipping priests and school principals.
What are their strengths? Weaknesses?
Background?
Training?
Fears? Doubts? Frustrations?

[Notes]
But first, we’re equipping priests and school principals.
What describes them?

What are their strengths? Weaknesses?
Background?
Training?
Fears? Doubts? Frustrations?
Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
need, vision, & strategy
What’s the need?

What’s missing from understanding, skills, teaching, programming, and impact in churches/schools?

[Notes]
What’s missing from understanding, skills, teaching, programming, and impact in churches/schools?

are your churches/schools teaching what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage? discernment?
or are they enable straight Christians to ignore God’s wisdom to their own detriment
and then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship?
enabling romance idolatry? divorce/remarriage? no openness to raising children? casual dating?
(hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom)

are your churches/schools teaching winsomely and biblically about God’s love and wisdom for gay people?
or are they avoiding the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
(Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.)

are your churches equipping parents to have age-appropriate convos with kids about God’s love and wisdom for everyone’s sexuality?
or are they waiting until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

are your churches/schools equipped to provide effective and empathetic discipleship in-house?
or do parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

are your churches/schools places where people walking out vocational singleness or a mixed orientation marriage will readily find the support/resources they need to thrive?
or are the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable?
They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

can priest/principals answer the tough questions about LGBT+ topics?
can they make a positive and compelling case for God’s wisdom?
respond to the most convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic?
do they know how to navigate pride/coming out/identity?
do they know how to navigate gender incongruence? trans conversations?
do they Flirt with revisionist sexual ethics, to the detriment of gay people
or sit the fence on sexual ethics, to the detriment of gay people
do they concede that historic sexual ethics increase suicidality (when it doesn’t)
do they argue about sexual ethics when disagreements are about something more foundational
What’s your vision?
In contrast, what would it look like a decade from now if all those needs were addressed and we were seeing long-term fruit? Paint a picture!

[Notes]
What’s missing from understanding, skills, teaching, programming, and impact in churches/schools?

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?
As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.
Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.


priest/principals can answer the tough questions about LGBT+ topics
can make a positive and compelling case for God’s wisdom
can respond to the most convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
they know how to navigate pride/coming out/identity
they know how to navigate gender incongruence and trans conversations
they don’t argue about sexual ethics when disagreements are about something more foundational
What’s the strategy?

What steps will we need to take to realize that vision?

[Notes]
what would it take to get there?
we’re going to go into more detail in a second
and I’ve already mapped out the steps we’ll take in this phase of partnership
but what else comes to mind that it’d be necessary for us to do to realize that vision?
Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
outcomes & methods
What are the outcomes we hope for?

What understanding do you want to ensure priest/principals possess? Skills/competencies?

[Notes]
What’s missing from understanding, skills, teaching, programming, and impact in churches/schools?
ITS OKAY IF THERES OVERLAP WITH PREVIOUS

haven't thought through diversity (they need to know how to articulate historic sexual ethic as diversity and engage in diversity converstaion) (compare it to other conversations about difficult diverse experiences)
what do we do with our desires generally? (it's about stewarding so we can enjoy the most life)
case studies are really helpful
what's the competency/skills they need?
What methods will help us get there?

What do we already know about the best training methods, training context, resources, etc. to achieve our goals?

[Notes]
What do we already know about the best training methods, training context, resources, etc. to achieve our goals?

sync on pedagogy
he wants lots of time where people can externally process their honest answer
ask whether those would be compelling
share their fears
any barriers they experience
What are we willing to let go of?

In order to accomplish what is possible, where are we willing to compromise? Not?

[Notes]
particularly for this first phase, Of all the good things we want to accomplish, what are we willing to let go of because it’s not the greatest good?
How will we navigate pushback?

From priests? School principals?
Other archdiocesan leaders? The public? Parishioners? Parents? Students?

[Notes]
How will we navigate pushback? From priests? School principals?
Other archdiocesan leaders? The public? Parishioners? Parents? Students?


Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
content options
What should we offer?

God's good wisdom for everyone's sexual stewardship
In light of that wisdom for all, God's love and wisdom for LGBT+ people
Embody God’s love and wisdom in discipleship

[Notes]
God's good wisdom for everyone's sexual stewardship
Exploring how God has invited all of us to steward our sexualities
including our calling to discern and faithfully step into either vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
Content would also point out the idolatry of romance
and the double-standard of sexual stewardship,
name the loneliness that everyone feels,
and raise awareness for the need for better family for singles.

In light of that wisdom for all, God's love and wisdom for LGBT+ people
Opening with confession of the ways Christians have gotten in the way of God's love and wisdom.
Then zooming out from sexual/gender ethics to recognize that most disagreement comes from disagreement about more fundamental faith questions.
Content would carefully describe the various theological perspective,
address the most convincing arguments for revisionist sexual/gender ethics,
and give a positive appeal for historic sexual/gender ethics.
Content would also explore FAQs around Christianity & LGBT+ people.

Embody God’s love and wisdom in discipleship
Equipping leaders to effectively and empathetically minister to LGBT+ people,
including soft skills, awareness of closet wounds, space to mourn, connection to professional counseling,
connection to robust community, clarity of vocation, and solidifying convictions.
Offer a winsome witness by committing to prevent the wounds of the closet, raising the bar for everyone's sexual stewardship,
cultivating robust human family for singles, upskilling to offer better pastoral care,
and equipping everyday Christians to engage in these conversations with grace.
Advice to how to navigate pride, coming out, and diversity.
Explore common traps in pastoral care and cover possible ministry case studies.


A resource toolbox would include:
Vision and strategy
Theology
Policies
Guidance for pastoral care around case studies/common scenarios
Curriculum, content slide decks, scripts, and handouts for teaching parish staff and school teachers
FAQ
Access to Equip’s Parent Course and Conversation Scripts
Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
terminology & theology
What range of terms do we want to use?

To describe LGBT+ people
To describe different perspectives

[Notes]
What range of terms do we want to use? To describe LGBT+ people?

•	Same-sex attraction / gender incongruence

•	LGBT+

•	Gender / sexual minority

•	Queer

•	Homosexual

•	Gay, lesbian, bisexual

•	Trans / transgender


What range of terms do we want to use? To describe different perspectives?

•	Historic / traditional / biblical / orthodox / apostolic / Catholic

•	Gay-affirming / progressive / revisionist / heterodox

•	Ex-gay / pray the gay away



How do we name and relate different states?

[Notes]
How do we name and relate different states?

Temporary / uncommitted singleness

Vocational / committed / kingdom / singleness / celibacy

Christian marriage

Discernment

Vocation

Sacrament

Gift / provision / grace

What do we believe?
God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)
What do we believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay (Matthew 6:12-13, James 1:14-15, Hebrews 4:15)
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin (John 10:28-30, Romans 8:38-39, Ephesians 4:30)
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay (Romans 1:26-28, Romans 5:12, James 1:13, Psalm 51:5)
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond
What do we believe?
What do we believe?
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation
There is no proven formula for changing a persons’ attractions
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage (Matthew 19, 1 Corinthians 7, Ephesians 5)

[Notes]
Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question:
Why do bad things happen to seemingly innocent people?
People don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation—they’re innocent in that way. So why?

Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God usually lets the consequences of our decisions play out. That’s the theological concept of free process.
If God stepped in every time and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choices? No.
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.

How does that apply to broken sexuality? I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others. Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations (which some may refer to a generational sin). Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
(To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.)
But then to protect my free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do we believe?
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context (Romans 1, Leviticus 18:22, Leviticus 20:13, 1 Corinthians 6:9-10)
What do we believe?
God first intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women (Genesis 1-3).
The Bible forbids genital mutilation (Deuteronomy 22:5 and Deuteronomy 23:1), cross-dressing as part of cult practices (1 Corinthians 11:2-16), and the elimination of gender difference (1 Corinthians 11:2-16).
What do we believe?
The authors of Scripture were aware of trans* people.
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
The Bible makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family (Isaiah 56:1-5, Acts 8:25-39).
What do we believe?
The Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes (Psalm 51:10-11, Micah 6:8, I Samuel 18:1-3, Proverbs 31, Judges 4:4, Acts 16:14, Luke 7:47,50).
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.
What do we believe?
God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us.
Everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. As such, most biblical examples of what it means to be male/female are imperfect.
Cultural concepts of gender are broken, leading to arbitrarily assigning preference to one gender or another.
What do we believe?
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown.
God didn’t intend gender incongruence. He intended for each to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman.
No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence.
What do we believe?
While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.
Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.
What do we believe?
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken. Available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans* people as intersex.
What do we believe?
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) is a sin.
Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
Session Objectives

Anchor our work
Review partnership process
Clarify audience characteristics
Identify need, vision, & strategy
Brainstorm outcomes & methods
Survey training content options
Clarify terminology & theology
Anticipate discipleship moments
discipleship moments
Common discipleship moments

What circumstances should school principals, priests, parishioners, parents, and students be prepared for?

[Notes]
Identify Common Discipleship Moments
list them
if time, start teasing out what outcomes theyd hope for

