Vocational Singleness in the Early Church
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

A founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about vocational singleness and sexuality
published in places like Christianity Today and Mere Orthodoxy
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
The premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where LGBT+ Christians thrive for a lifetime according to historic sexual ethics
We’ve trained over 28,000 Christian leaders in 325 trainings at 100+ different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.

I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about vocational singleness and sexuality
 
I’m a founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenically Christian monastery building lifetime family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving clients navigating deep questions of faith and sexuality
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
Vocational Singleness in the Early Church

[Notes]
today we’re gonna focus on what the early Church understood Jesus to teach about what we’re gonna call vocational singleness
and why those teachings might be just what we need today
Key Questions

What is “vocational singleness”?
How did the Early Church live it out?
What difference might that make today?
What’s “vocational singleness”?
Background

God made all of us for connection in the context of community
designed two best ways to enjoy: Christian marriage and vocational singleness
provided wisdom for thriving in each

[Notes]
some background

The Scriptures teach that God made all of us for connection in the context of community
That God designed two best ways to enjoy connection in the context of community: Christian marriage and vocational singleness
And He provided us with wisdom in Scripture about the best ways to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness


Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
what is vocational singleness?

vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

let me break down each of those

“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling

The Scriptures also teach that God knows whether vocational singleness or Christian marriage would be better for each of us, individually
And He says He wants to give us that particular gift of vocational singleness or Christian marriage

This even shows up in 1 Cor 7
verse 7:
I wish that all of you were as I am. But each of you has your own gift from God; one has this gift, another has that.

Paul himself was called to and living out lifetime celibacy for the sake of serving God
And he wishes that every Christian was called to vocational singleness
But Paul recognizes that each Christian has their own gift from God
God wants to give some the gift of vocational singleness
And God wants to give others the gift of Christian marriage

How do we figure out which gift God wants to give us?
That’s a topic for another time
But briefly, Christians young adults have historically spent some time intentionally bringing this question to God and discerning with the help of mentors, friends, and their local church

but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent

In 1 Cor 7 verses 7, 8, 26, and 40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
Plus, the early Church unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be teaching about a permanent commitment to celibate singleness
The disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples, unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy, instead of waiting for marriage.

We’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle),
St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens,
Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus. 

this is different from the temporary abstinent singleness which we’re all born into
vocational singleness is a particular kind of singleness that the Bible speaks of as being an intentional, committed, lifelong singleness
There’s a big difference between just w aiting for marriage
vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.


“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family

In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 

In 1 Cor 7 Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children
and then in verses 36-38 he recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship
by talking about a particular way that celibate people experimented with finding companionship
Better to Marry? (1 Cor 7:9)

If you find abstinence difficult, does that mean you’re called to marriage?

It’s unwise to step into either vocational singleness or Christian marriage without the gift!

[Notes]
Now some might respond: “Doesn’t 1 Corinthians 7:9 say that if you find abstinence difficult, you’re called to marriage?”

Let me read that passage – starting in verse 8

Now to the unmarried[a] and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do.
But if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.

What do we do with that?
Well, it is a common misinterpretation to read that as saying, “if I find abstinence difficult, that must mean God is calling me to marriage.”

It’s actually more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter

Regardless, the general principle holds true:
it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.

But the same could be said of marriage:
it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
Jesus gives that opposite advice in Matthew 19 – if you don’t have the gift of marriage and you’re not ready for God’s high standards for Christian marriage, then don’t step into it!

“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in two big ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children,
to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do

In 1 Cor 7:32-35, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
here’s what he says:
32 I would like you to be free from concern. An unmarried man is concerned about the Lord’s affairs—how he can please the Lord.
33 But a married man is concerned about the affairs of this world—how he can please his wife—
34 and his interests are divided. An unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the Lord’s affairs: Her aim is to be devoted to the Lord in both body and spirit.
But a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world—how she can please her husband.
35 I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord.
 
And second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for how the world will be when Jesus returns
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants.
So when they saw Christian celibates experiencing just as much family, belonging, and honor as married people;
they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.

But let me update that for a modern audience.
Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness.
So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete
—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.

Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community
without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour teaching that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

What if you spent all of the time/energy you would spend on spouse+kids to instead serve those are the margins? What would you do?
What do you think?
Key Questions

What is “vocational singleness”?
How did the Early Church live it out?
How did the Early Church live it out?

remnuoth - city celibates
Permanent (not waiting for marriage)
Informal single-sex urban clusters + part of local churches (not alone or cloistered)
Participated in economy (not just praying)
Served church + city (not neglecting others)
Common (not exceptional)
Early Church Celibacy

[Notes]
according to primary sources about celibacy in the first five centuries of the church
Before cave monks and dessert ascetics and cloistered monasteries

there were what’s called the remnuoth
city celibates
And they walked out this city celibacy in a particular way

First, their celibacy was permanent
the disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy
Instead of waiting for marriage

Second, they lived in cities in homes with other celibates of the same sex in informal monasteries
and they were still a part of their local churches
Instead of living alone or cloistered from married Christians

Third, they were still a part of the economic life of the city
Instead of praying all day in closets or caves

Fourth, they felt called to leverage their availability in singleness to serve others in their church and their city
Instead of running away to serve themselves

And fifth, they were common
there were tens of thousands of them, actually 20,000 of them in one city no larger than 100,000 according to records
This wasn’t exceptional

THIS is the secret sauce

And we’re doing just that here in Nashville
back in 2017, I met with my pastor
I shared that I felt called to vocational singleness, but I didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need some kind of family
I asked him how I could find the family in the body of Christ I needed?
And he responded:
”To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family.
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church
The greatest source of theology in the Church
And the greatest source of social justice in the Church
I think you should start something in Nashville
Build the family you need
And stay connected to our church and teach us how to do family better
Find 2-3 other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!



Celibacy Lived Out

[Notes]
fast forward to today...the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches. We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood. We’re still connected to parents and their kids.
And 7 of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family as we discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
And a few months ago I made lifetime commitments to this family

Now there’s multiple ways vocational singles can find permanent family
In addition to starting an intentional Christina community, singles can
Move in with an unrelated nuclear family and eventually make commitments with them
Or commit to living with some of their biological family

but I think Christians should really consider this remnuoth solution
because it's been the most successful way celibate Christians have found family historically
and I think it might be just what our world needs



What would you find beautiful about living in an aro/ace polycule? Difficult?
What do you think?
Key Questions

What is “vocational singleness”?
How did the Early Church live it out?
What difference might that make today?
What difference might it make today?

We’re tired of competing for belonging and living in an unjust world.

What could you do to build a world where everyone finds family? What could you do to truly serve the marginalized?
What about today?

[Notes]
we’re tried of competing for belonging
aren’t you tired of having to be attractive enough or smart enough or rich enough or funny enough to be loved?

and don’t we yearn to actually make the world better for those who are most hurting?
racial injustice is multiplying,
the marginalization of immigrants and refugees is widening
homelessness is building,
mental illness is proliferating,
wealth inequality is deepening,
and homophobia and transphobia are growing

more so than some previous generations, we deeply yearn to do something about that

vocational singleness lived out in community addresses both of those

vocational singleness makes people available to address those areas of brokenness in our world
with undivided attention
with all of the time and energy we might spend on raising kids
doubling our kingdom work capacity.

And when lived out in communities like the remnuoth and like NFOB,
it provides family without romance or exclusivity
it previews a future where we can all find belonging and love and companionship without having to compete

and I don’t think that’s an accident
I think that what Christ’s plan

now I know most of you won’t make lifetime commitments to vocational singleness
and to live in a modern monastery

but regardless of whether you’re a Christian, can I invite you to examine whether you’re really okay with belonging based on competition?
and if you live for yourself or your kids, will the world around us really get any better?

particularly if you’re not a Christian, but you find Jesus’s wisdom compelling
—his wisdom for some people to offer their entire life to the poor and needy
and offer each other companionship without exclusivity or competition—if you find that compelling,
what if Jesus knows what he’s talking about because he really is who he says he is
what if Jesus is really God who took human form because he wanted to begin a process of making the world right
and invite all of us back to his family, including you?

and if you’re a Christian, what if Jesus wants to do something about both of those,
and the way he wants to do that is by calling you to singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and to find community without romance or exclusivity
are you willing to listen, if Jesus calls?
are you willing to follow?
