Biblical Ethics& LGBT+ Topics
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Where we’re going
My story
The credibility problem
We’ve got to confess
We’ve got to be nuanced
We’ve got to be consistent
We’ve got to eliminate the closet
We’ve got to offer lasting family

[Notes]
here’s where we’re going to go this week
I want to share with you more about my story
then I’ll address the credibility problem historic sexual ethics has
and we’ll talk about five things churches that hold a historic sexual ethic have got to do
they’ve got to confess, be nuanced, be consistent, eliminate the closet, and offer lasting family
and in between each of these, I want to hear from you and explore any questions you have
my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

Bit out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.
 
Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity
I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.
I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.
These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.
 
After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us
By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started EQUIP in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a traditional sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family

since then, Equip has trained more than 20,000 Christians leaders
we’re the premier consulting and training solution for churches that want to become places where LGBT+ people thrive according to historic sexual ethics

and today, there are 7 guys in the Nashville Family of Brothers
we are an ecumenically Christian monastery building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.
Plus we pray together each morning before work,
have family dinner three nights a week,
worship together once a month,
go on vacation together and alternate Thanksgiving and Christmas with our biological families,
all while we discern whether to make lifetime commitments to our family
and how God is calling us to leverage our vocational singleness for the sake of the kingdom

and this September, I’m actually going to make lifetime commitments to vocational singleness and to the Nashville Family of Brothers!
credibility problem

[Notes]
Christians have made God's wisdom unconvincing

Gay people really are called to something functionally harder than straight people. Gay people will have to be more faithful to hold onto their faith. Some straight people will be less sold-out-for-Jesus than a gay peer, yet they'll persist while the gay Christian gives up.

That's the double burden of gay Christians.

There's good news: that's not how God intended it to be. He intended for fullness of life on this side of heaven to be just as accessible to gay people as straight people.

But it's not. Why?

Because the Church has consistently been unfaithful in ways that made it harder for gay people to know and follow Jesus.

In the past Christians have pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries, declared that merely experiencing same-sex attraction is a sin, and barred faithful gay Christians from ministry.

Today, many churches are silent about God's love and wisdom for gay people, leading kids to make sense of their sexuality alone in the closet.

Then too many churches today hold gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship than straight Christians and do little to support those called to lifetime celibacy.

so what do we do?
confess

[Notes]
we've got to confess the sins of the Church
You don’t have to apologize for (or abandon) a historic sexual ethic
And my hunch is that most of you have loved the gay people in your life well
You personally don't have anything to confess
But Nehemiah 9 and Ezra 9 make clear that it is good for the people of God to recognize and confess the collective sins of the Church
So I encourage you confess the ways Christians in the past were complicit in hate crimes and discrimination
taught that merely experiencing same-sex attraction was a sin
policed what words that LGBT+ people use to describe themselves
barred from leadership in church even if they were celibate
and propagated ex-gay theology that led millions of LGBT+ people to lose their life or faith
when you talk to non-straight or straight people who are skeptical of a historic sexual ethic, you can confess those things

including decoupling God's love and wisdom from pray-the-gay-away
why? because ex-gay theology not biblical
it is not just a more extreme version historic sexual ethics
it’s a rejection of historic sexual ethics
but when it gets conflated with historic sexual ethics, the suicide that pray-the-gay-away theology causes is them inaccurately associated with God’s wisdom

the reality is, there's scientific evidence to prove that historic sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide
it actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology
Christian sex ethics & suicide
Ex-gay theology increases suicidality by 92%
Revisionist sexual ethics often leads to loss of faith
Compassionate historic sexual ethics leads to mental and spiritual health

[Notes]
Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.

On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
it often leads to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
Most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.
Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:
At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.
Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshipping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
hey wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been Side A for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.
Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

That is a death of another kind.

Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?
Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
But then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.
So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help children in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
beliefs

[Notes]
we've got to share about God's love and wisdom for gay people in more nuanced ways - clarify my beliefs first
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay (Matthew 6:12-13, James 1:14-15, Hebrews 4:15)
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin (John 10:28-30, Romans 8:38-39, Ephesians 4:30)

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
What do I believe?
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay (Romans 1:26-28, Romans 5:12, James 1:13, Psalm 51:5)
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond

[Notes]
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore

Fifth, I don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond
What do I believe?
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage (Matthew 19, 1 Corinthians 7, Ephesians 5)

[Notes]
Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture.
People are neither born genetically determined to develop same-sex attractions, not do people choose to develop same-sex attractions.
People are neither born gay nor choose to be gay.
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do miracles,
And sometimes he does!
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question:
Why do bad things happen to seemingly innocent people?
People don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation—they’re innocent in that way. So why?

Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God usually lets the consequences of our decisions play out. That’s the theological concept of free process.
If God stepped in every time and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choices? No.
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.

How does that apply to broken sexuality? I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others. Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations (which some may refer to a generational sin). Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
(To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.)
But then to protect my free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life

What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years, God calls all Christians to traditional sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)
What do I believe?
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context (Romans 1, Leviticus 18:22, Leviticus 20:13, 1 Corinthians 6:9-10)

[Notes]
There’s also no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
Even without investigating the so-called clobber passages that Christians have historically understood to prohibit same-sex sexual activity
We can conclude from what God has clearly said about what His best is for us (vocational singleness or Christian marriage)
And the absence of affirmation of same-sex sexual activity in any context
That same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

Okay, so that’s what I believe
What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a progressive sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction

For me, while I’m not bisexual, I’m not generally attracted to women
I have been in a couple of dating relationships with women where I was transparent about my sexuality and grew a desire for them specifically
so I knew that if God wanted me to get married to a women, that could work
but more important than what I want, I started asking God in 2014 what He wanted for me.
Would He rather I get married or commit to vocational singleness?
And around 2017 I felt strongly that God was calling me to vocational singleness.
 
But no one can live life alone. So in 2018 some friends and I started building the Nashville Family of Brothers
A place where I could find lifelong, lived-in family with others called to vocational singleness
consistency

[Notes]
we've got to be consistent

Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.

This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, churches can invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.

This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance,
having sex outside of marriage, making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography,
failing to consider a call to vocational singleness, unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.

These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God’s inconvenient wisdom
and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.
Raising the bar
casual romance
sex outside of marriage
pornography use
failing to discern singleness & marriage
refusing openness to raise children in marriage
unbiblical divorce/remarriage
closet wounds

[Notes]
we’ve got to prevent the wounds of the closet

Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet making sense of their sexuality,
often without the love and wisdom of parents—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
the closet is a trauma
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.

As an LPC who meets with gay Christians committed to a historic sexual ethic,
the lingering wounds of the closet are usually the greatest barrier to them thriving,
haunting them for a lifetime.

One of the best ways we can care for gay people in our churches is to make sure kids share with parents as soon as they notice same-sex attractions.
In doing so, we can prevent these wounds from ever happening,
leading to a lifetime of thriving according to God’s teachings.

But for kids to share early about their sexuality,
parents need coaching and encouragement to teach about God’s love and wisdom for gay people before their kids enter puberty.

Unfortunately most parents feel ill-equipped to start wound-preventing conversations.
Why?
Because pastors feel ill-equipped to train parents.

Instead, pastors need to get the training they need to equip parents
to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality,
helping prevent the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.
lasting family

[Notes]
we’ve got to offer vocational singles lived-in, lifelong family

Few churches are places where anyone can thrive in lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom, regardless of sexual orientation.
Christian leaders don’t teach vocational singleness, teens don’t see vocational singleness modeled or celebrated,
and too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone

Instead, our churches can teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness,
guide teens and young adults to discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage,
hire vocationally single leaders and pastors, and celebrate the callings of those called to vocational singleness.

Moreover, churches must ensure that vocational singles enjoy lifelong, lived-in family in the body of Christ
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities by suggesting the idea,
helping them cast vision for it, providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility,
coaching them through the process, and even providing financial support in the early years.
Where we’re going
My story
The credibility problem
We’ve got to confess
We’ve got to be nuanced
We’ve got to be consistent
We’ve got to eliminate the closet
We’ve got to offer lasting family

[Notes]
here’s where we’re going to go this week
I want to share with you more about my story
then I’ll address the credibility problem historic sexual ethics has
and we’ll talk about five things churches that hold a historic sexual ethic have got to do
they’ve got to confess, be nuanced, be consistent, eliminate the closet, and offer lasting family
and in between each of these, I want to hear from you and explore any questions you have
questions?
gay Christian?

[Notes]
calling myself gay:
no perfect word
identifying with people, not brokeness
phenom, not ontolog
