Navigating Gender Incongruence &Caring for Trans* People

[Notes]
Welcome back to “Navigating Gender Incongruence & Caring for Trans* People” with Equip.
I’m Jesse White, Equip’s Trans* Content Specialist.
The goal of these sessions is to equip Christian leaders and parents to think wisely and empathetically about gender incongruence.
And to help Christian leaders and parents offer God’s love and wisdom to those navigating gender incongruence and to trans* people,
while those Christian leaders and parents challenge their churches to grow their capacity to support trans* people in compassionate and theologically accurate ways

Last session we examined passages of Scripture often cited in conversations about gender ethics and shared how Equip invites Christian leaders and pastors to think theologically about ministering to trans* people
SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories & Terminology
2. The Bible + Theology
3. Culture & Pastoral Care
4. Kids & Case Studies


[Notes]
This session, we’ll survey alternate Christian and non-Christian perspectives on gender ethics and share how you can better care for those navigating gender incongruence in your churches and families

And finally, in our fourth session, we’ll zoom in on caring for kids and teens who share about incongruence, and then we’ll conclude our sessions with a series of case studies spanning a range of scenarios you might encounter


Remember, sex and gender…
Sex—Being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—Psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity

[Notes]
Remember, we’re using the words sex and gender in specific and different ways.

A person’s sex (male or female) is defined by his or her chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics.
These include the presence or absence of a Y chromosome, internal reproductive organs, external sexual anatomy,
and endocrine systems that produce secondary sex characteristics.

When I refer to someone’s gender, I am referring to the pychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity
(how you experience yourself and how masculine/feminine a person feels) and gender role (adoptions of cultural expectations for males/females). 



Gender incongruence, trans*
Gender Incongruence – An acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex

Transgender/Trans* – A general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence

[Notes]
When I use the phrase ”gender incongruence”, I’m referring to an acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex.

When I use the word ”transgender” or shortened to “trans” with an asterisk, I’m referring to a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence.
To be clear, when I use the word trans to refer to someone, I’m not communicating anything about their theological convictions or the extent to which they have transitioned.
I am merely using that word to refer to a person who is navigating gender incongruence.
I’ll use those words and phrases most commonly and interchangeably.



Femaleness, maleness, femininity, and masculinity 
Femaleness/Maleness – the nature of being biologically female or biologically male

Femininity/Masculinity – a person’s sense of being a woman/man and cultural expectations for how women/men will express their gender

[Notes]
When I say “Femaleness/Maleness,” I’m referring to the nature of being biologically female or biologically male.

When I say “Masculinity/Femininity,” I’m referring to a person’s sense of being a woman or being a man and cultural expectations for how men and women will express their gender. Cultural expectations can and often are different between different regions in the same nation, between different nations, and between generations.


SECULAR & PROGRESSIVE RESPONSES

[Notes]
During our last session I shared how Equip invites Christian leaders and pastors to think theologically about ministering to trans* people.

But there are multiple perspectives on this topic among Christians and between Christians and non-Christians.

So let’s explore other perspectives and how Christians who hold a historic gender ethic can think charitably about those perspectives
and engage effectively.

Secular, Binary-Affirming
Affirm gender/sex binary
Believe they were meant to be born into a body that matches their gender
Seek to preserve/strengthen cultural distinctions/stereotypes between men and women

[Notes]
Secular worldviews on gender identity questions are diverse but can be distilled into two, seemingly contradictory, camps.
First, many affirm the existence of a gender binary but merely believe that their physical body does not match the gender of their mind, soul, or spirit.
Advocates for this perspective, such as Caitlyn Jenner, want to preserve the distinction between men and women while allowing people to conform their bodies to their gender.
Some note that this response to gender incongruence actually deepens gender stereotypes and increases distress for those who do not feel like transition is the right step for them.

Secular, Deconstructionist
Reject gender/sex binary
Seek to deconstruct both gender and sex as arbitrary labels/constructs to be discarded
This perspective is accused of silencing or invalidating those who have transitioned 

[Notes]
The second perspective rejects the gender binary altogether.

Often younger transgender people, advocates for this perspective want to deconstruct any male/female or man/woman distinction,
seeing them as arbitrary labels that ignore the wide range of genders and biological sexes along a spectrum.

As the editors of Understanding Transgender Identities: Four Views explain,
“an increasingly common area of criticism leveled against queer theory [is] that it frequently disregards the lived experiences of the very people it appeals to in its theoretical arguments.
More specifically, from early on queer theorists tended to cast a skeptical eye on the transsexual sector of the transgender community.
The reason for this is simple.”

the editors continue, “The reported experience of many transsexuals is that their true self, which they often describe in terms of an innate and unchanging gender identity,
is trapped in the ‘wrong body’ (i.e. the wrong biological sex).
But this sort of claim appears to depend on something like a fixed, essentialist identity and the male/female sex binary, which runs afoul of the central convictions of queer theory.
This explains why many trans activists who embrace queer theory have often expressed attitudes toward SRS (Sexual Reassignment Surgery) ranging from ambivalence to outright disdain...."

Contradicting Secular Ideas
One seeks to strengthen the gender/sex binary, while the other seeks to eliminate it.

[Notes]
Ultimately, the “solutions to the problem” that each perspective advocates for are contradictory and compete against each other.
One seeks to maintain the gender/sex binary while the other seeks to deconstruct it.
This complicates a Christian’s response to secular worldviews regarding gender incongruence because secular progressives offer multiple, opposing explanations.




Progressive Christian Views
Some no longer see the Bible as authoritative, freeing Christians to follow secular ethics
Others interpret Christ’s words about eunuchs and the lack of marriage/sex in heaven as blessing medical transition

[Notes]
Then some progressive Christians embrace secular philosophies toward gender incongruence.

Some simply claim that the Bible isn’t binding or authoritative for modern Christians,
so Christians can choose to follow whatever gender ethic they feel is most fair and true.

Other progressive Christians argue that the mention and embrace of eunuchs in the New Testament signals that genital alteration has been made holy by Jesus,
in addition to claims that there will be no gender or biological sex in heaven (therefore whatever a person feels is most authentic should be accommodated).

How can Christians who hold a historic gender ethic response?
Recognize the brokenness of cultural gender prescriptions
Honor the pain of those navigating gender incongruence
Affirm God’s good design of the sex/gender binary
Become churches where trans* Christian can thrive according to God’s wisdom

[Notes]
Christians who continue to hold a historic sexual ethic can respond by recognizing that cultural gender prescriptions are, indeed, broken,
and we believe that our gender ethic should be informed by how Christians have consistently understood the Scriptures.

As we covered in our previous session,
Christians have historically understood the Scriptures to teach that God intended for each of us to be either male-bodied men and female-bodied women.

That differences between gender expression should not be eliminated, and that altering one’s genitals is a sin.

Yet some people, by no choice of their own, but instead as a product of the Fall, experience gender incongruence.
Their experience of their gender is painfully broken.

Instead of reinforcing gender stereotypes or eliminating gender and sex altogether,
we should resist the urge to over-prescribe cultural gender,
and we should affirm God’s good design of the sex/gender binary,
all by drawing close to those navigating gender incongruence,
and becoming churches where trans* Christians can thrive according to historic gender ethics.

How?
That’s our next section!
But first…


QUESTIONS
How do the “two camps” of secular worldviews on this topic make a Christian response difficult?

What might it look like for Christians to resist cultural gender stereotypes while affirming the gender/sex binary?

[Notes]
Take some time to review your notes, and then reflect individually or with others on the following questions:
1. How do the “two camps” of secular worldviews on this topic make a Christian response difficult?
2. What might it look like for Christians to resist cultural gender stereotypes while affirming the gender/sex binary?


HOW TOMINISTER

[Notes]
How, then, can our churches becomes places where trans* Christians can thrive according to historic gender ethics?
How to minister?
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor lack of choice + explore morally neutral relief
Support acceptance of brokenness/suffering
Address childhood shame from hurtful messages
Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage to share their stories & gather

[Notes]
I’ve got seven suggestions for offering God’s love and wisdom for trans* Christians:
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor the lack of choice and help trans* Christians explore options morally neutral relief
Support their acceptance of some amount of brokenness and suffering
Address childhood shame from spoken and unspoken hurtful messages
Give trans* Christians permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
And, encourage trans* Christians to share their stories and gather together 


1. General posture for ministry
Resist ”transition or suicide!” & “just be normal!”
Instead, believe trans* people when they share about their experience
Honor their lack of choice, the cost of faithful stewardship, and the Church’s responsibility
Commit to walking with them, helping them discern, and reminding them of Christ’s love for them and faithfulness to them

[Notes]
First, I want to suggest a general posture of empathy and compassion toward trans* people:

It’s easy to use that which you don’t understand as a target for jokes, sermon illustrations, blame shifting, or just a focal point for anger and fear.
Remember that every trans* person, or rather, every person regardless of their life and experience, is their own unique individual.

Each person you meet has their own story to tell, their own joys and sorrows, difficulties and triumphs, ways that God has allowed them to suffer,
and ways that God has provided abundantly.

Trans people are no different.
They are not just a statistic on a screen, a political agenda, or a piece of legislature in the senate.
They are people made in the image of God who are valued greatly by Him, and we, as His church, should greatly value trans people as well.
We know that for trans people around the world, mental health issues and suicide rates are higher than any other category in the LGBTQIA+ community.
This should be alarming!
This means the Enemy has misled a majority of trans* image-bearers to believe their lives are less valuable and less worthy of relationship.

Culturally, trans* individuals are bombarded with two conflicting messages. 
One side yells, "Transition or suicide!”
The other yells, ”Just be normal!”

Neither is the primary solution.
Instead, we need to believe trans* people when they share about their experience.
We need to recognize that trans* people have done nothing to bring about their gender incongruence.
We need to honor that faithfully stewarding gender incongruence will be costly and demands the support of trans* people’s siblings in Christ.

Pastors and parents, trans* need your care and respect.
They need to know that you will walk with them and help them discern the most faithful ways for them to steward their gender incongruence.
Take your time building trust and rapport.

Discipleship also takes time, effort, and investment which can be hard and complicated. 
This is true for any believer,
but trans* Christians can find the strength to faithfully follow God’s wisdom when pastors and parents consistently show that they care for trans* people.

More than that, they need to know that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life.

They need to know that while it is hard and difficult to live in a world (and a body) broken by sin,
brokenness will not be our experience forever;
we have a hope and a future unmarred by brokenness.


2. Prioritize addressing any mental health challenges
Proven interventions to reduce suicidality:
Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
A broader community of social support

[Notes]
Second, Prioritize addressing any mental health challenges

Caring for people means caring for them holistically.

Those navigating gender incongruence often suffer from various mental health challenges.
Pastors and parents should prioritize connecting trans* people with proven interventions to address the mental health challenges they face.

Knowing that rates of suicidal ideation and attempts are so high among trans* people,
you should know that research has consistently found four ingredients to be most effective at reducing suicidality:

(in no particular order)
Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
A broader community of social support

If a trans* person your supporting is struggling with suicidality, help them find a therapist or counselor,
go with them on walks, and help them maintain and deepen connections with safe friends and family.
3. Honor lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Recognize their lack of choice.

Help trans* Christians resolve what they can by exploring morally neutral options for incongruence relief.

[Notes]
Third, after adequately addressing mental health challenges, the trans* people you’re supporting will hopefully be in a better place to explore how they will steward their gender incongruence.

Start by honoring their lack of choice and the painful need to accept some level of enduring brokenness.

Transgender people do not choose to experience gender incongruence.
Some may rebel by bucking cultural gender expectations, but rebellion does not create robust, enduring gender incongruence.
Trans* people often endure significant distress due to their gender incongruence—why would they choose to experience that pain?
So recognize and honor their lack of choice.

Then, help them resolve what they can and manage what they must.
Trans* people don’t choose to experience gender incongruence, but they do have the responsibility to faithfully steward their brokenness.
Support trans* Christians as they consider morally neutral options in the range of social transition that might provide relief from the gender incongruence.
Help them weigh each possibility and carefully step forward where the Lord leads.

4. Support acceptance of some brokenness/suffering
Help trans* Christians manage what they must by accepting some level of enduring brokenness/suffering.

Hold space for them to grieve acceptance with anger, sadness, fear, and numbness.

[Notes]
Even still, many of the trans* Christians you support will continue to experience some persisting and painful gender incongruence, even after some social transition.

And while current studies on hormonal and surgical transition have been shown not to significantly reduce suicidality and other mental health challenges,
trans* Christians yearning for further relief will certainly be burdened by cultural messages that further transition will eliminate their distress.

So fourth, respond by encouraging them to resist further transition that is unlikely to provide the relief they desire,
and instead invite them to accept some level of enduring brokenness.
Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life.
Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness.
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls.

Help trans* Christians you’re ministering to explore ways Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering,
and found a way to accept persisting brokenness.

And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.

Some pain will be unavoidable.
Trans* people can’t avoid using a name of themselves, using pronouns, going to the bathroom, wearing clothes, or speaking with a pitched voice.
There will be daily, unavoidable, and painful reminders for trans* people of their gender incongruence.

Make space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb.
Reassure them their their feelings are valid and that their pain is real.
Promise them that you won’t leave their side, and then stay.
5. Address any childhood shame from hurtful messages
Childhood gender incongruence combined with shameful messages related to gender stereotypes, amplifies internal shame & heightens fears of rejection.

Identify shame memories, feel through them, reject lies, and remember their value in Christ. 

[Notes]
Fifth, identify and heal any painful memories of being shamed via spoken and unspoken hurtful messages

Most of us, regardless of gender experience, can recall moments from our childhoods,
when we preferred something that kids of our gender weren’t supposed to prefer,
or showed a disinterest or dislike toward things kids of our gender were supposed to like,
not based on any biblical prescriptions for gender,
but because of arbitrary gender over-prescriptions from culture.

And then we were shamed by parents and siblings and friends and pastors.
Directly or indirectly, we were given a choice:
1: reject your preference, learn to dislike what you like, learn to like what you dislike, and internalize shame to fit in
or
2: continue to like what you like, continue dislike what you dislike, and continue to be shamed and teased and rejection
It’s a lose-lose scenario for many kids and teens, regardless of gender incongruence.

But these forced choices were particularly painful for kids who also noticed gender incongruence.
External messages of shame and rejection combined with a worrying internal sense that their body and their heart didn’t match.

These forced-choice moments around overprescribed cultural gender amplified the internal shame gender incongruence was producing,
and heightened fears of how painfully they would be rejected if they shared about how they felt different in an even more fundamental way.

Some of the distress trans* Christians experience in the present may come from unprocessed childhood moments like these that haunt their present.

Care for trans* Christians by helping them identify shaming memories like these,
create space for them to connect with any lingering sadness or anger or fear and feel through those unprocessed feelings,
name how false and arbitrary those forced-choices were,
and reassure them of their inherent worth and value as image-bearers, including their unique ways of expressing themselves, even when it’s contrary to cultural stereotypes.
6. Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Parents and pastors can join trans* Christians by resisting historical over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are, while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.

[Notes]
Sixth, give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes

As discussed previously, Western culture has arbitrarily attributed preferences and affinities to gender that have nothing inherently to do with gender.

While the core of a trans* Christians’ distress is an internal sense that one’s biological sex and felt gender are incongruent,
feeling forced to comply with arbitrary cultural expectations can multiply distress.

Help trans* Christians reduce pain related to their gender by giving them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes.

Parents and pastors can join trans* Christians by resisting historical over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are,
while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.

As we’ll explore more in a moment,
giving trans* Christians (and any Christians) permission to express themselves in culturally atypical ways
may raise questions or concerns with siblings in Christ who are less aware of the arbitrary nature of gender stereotypes.

Pastors and parents can protect trans* Christians from harassment for their preferences and affinities,
by engaging with concerned believers,
and assuring them that rejection of cultural gender does not mean rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex or gender.
7. Encourage to share their stories and gather together 
Trans* Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved.

Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding.

[Notes]
Last but not least, pastors and parents should encourage Christians navigating gender incongruence to share their stories and gather

Trans* Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved.
They need to share their stories, and they need to see their siblings in Christ respond with curiosity and compassion.

At the same time, our churches need to hear the stories of trans* Christians who are faithfully steward their brokenness.
Cis-gender Christians can learn from the courage and resiliency of trans* Christians.
And cis-gender Christians can gain self-awareness about the ways cultural gender stereotypes haunt them by empathizing with trans* Christians.

Pastors and parents and also need to encourage trans* Christians to gather with other trans* Christians.
Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding.

Each of these opportunities for Christian fellowship can contribute to greater spiritual growth,
discovering shared meaning in suffering, and enjoying healthy intimacy in a community of believers.
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
Given names and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of the pain and tension that is felt every day.

Identifying as trans can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence” or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between).

[Notes]
In addition to those seven suggestions for better pastoral care, I want to offer some suggestions about pronouns and policy

First, what should trans Christians call themselves? What names/pronouns should pastors/ministers use?
Many people have a wide variety of opinions and beliefs when it comes to names/pronouns and identifying as trans*.

For those who experience gender incongruence,
their given name and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of that pain and tension that is felt every day.

Some experience meaningful relief from that tension when they adopt different pronouns and/or names.
Identifying as trans, similar to identifying as gay, bi, lesbian, etc. can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence”,
or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self”,
(and everything in between).

For those using the word trans merely to communicate that they experience gender incongruence,
that identity helps others know and understand that this is a part of who the person is but does not encompass the whole of who they are. 

It can also open up the possibility for deeper conversation around the topic of faith and gender especially if this person is a Christian.
Pastors and parents should be willing and ready to respond graciously and to explore with the individual what their name,
preferred pronouns, and use of the word trans means to them.

In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to the identifiers, names, and pronouns that the individual uses, and then use those same words as an act of hospitality.
You might ask the individual what they mean when they use those words.

Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings, but instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language.

This is a simple but effective way to diffuse potential tension early in the relationship and open the door for future conversation.
Prayer and discernment should be an important part of the relationship and if they are willing to do so,
walk with them through how changing their name and pronouns can be honoring and/or dishonoring to God,
and what He is doing in their life.

Furthermore, be open to how God can and will change your own heart toward the matter at hand.
Above all, let your posture be one of grace and love towards those who are created in His image. 

Policies for bathrooms, sleeping arrangements, leader, etc.
Case-by-case basis often leads to painfully-inconsistently application. 

Trans* Christians prefer policy clarity, even when they disagree with the ultimate placement of boundaries.

[Notes]
And finally, some wisdom about bathrooms, sleeping arrangements, and gender expression by leaders:

While compassionate and biblical pastoral care should be a church’s first priority,
detailing policies are eventually necessary.

Some might prefer to address practical questions about bathrooms, overnight camps,
the public presentation of leaders, etc. on a case-by-case basis,
but that strategy is more likely to lead to painfully-inconsistent application.

Instead, churches can do their best to anticipate practical realities and describe policies that balance love and wisdom,
while humbly recognizing that the exact placement of boundaries may be imperfect.

Gender minorities prefer clarity that reduces anxiety, even when they disagree with the ultimate placement of those boundaries.
The following are suggestions for policies at your church,
but these suggestions are by no means definitive:
Approach marriage wisely – disclose incongruence early, honor sexual difference
Public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders
Bathrooms
Sleeping spaces on teen trips
Policies: marriage

[Notes]
First, approach marriage wisely

Christians navigating gender incongruence are not necessarily ineligible for marriage,
but are encouraged to disclose their experience and any related challenges to a spouse.

For churches convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic,
the Church has historically taught the sexual difference between husband and wife is a key aspect of God’s design for Christian marriage. 

While gender complementarity was also assumed,
biological sexual difference and the complementarity between God’s intentions for the partners’ sex/gender has consistently been stressed.

Therefore, even when gender incongruence persists,
two Christians of the opposite sex satisfy the need for sexual difference in Christian marriage.
Approach marriage wisely
Public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders – be clear and consistent if calling leaders to a higher standard, consider unspoken messages
Bathrooms
Sleeping spaces on teen trips
Policies: public presentation

[Notes]
Second, wisdom for public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders

If a church defines rules for gender expression,
it is important that that church be able to defend those rules and apply those justifications consistently across all populations.

Remember that most standards for public presentation are culturally-created,
not instituted by God for all people in all places in all times.

And remember the ways that gender overprescription have exacerbated or created gender incongruence in faithful believers.

Churches may call leaders to more narrow gender expression,
allowing for more diverse gender expression at the level of membership,
but asking leaders to conform to more traditional gender expression for the sake of those they lead.

At the same time, calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations that are not morally necessary may communicate to membership an unspoken message that they must conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved,
creating a barrier to the gospel and discipleship under the Lordship of Jesus.
Approach marriage wisely
Public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders
Bathrooms – install single-occupancy bathrooms, be respectful
Sleeping spaces on teen trips
Policies: bathrooms

[Notes]
Third, wisdom for bathrooms

Most trans people prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms.
If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom.

To avoid controversy, you can label it as a “family” bathroom and privately communicate to trans people that it’s an all-gender single-occupancy bathroom available to them.

Many trans people will avoid using the bathroom at church if no single-occupancy bathrooms are available.

Finally, if you notice that someone is using a bathroom different than their biological sex,
start with having respectful conversation to learn about their reasons for choosing to use a different bathroom.

Often, trans people will share about painful or scary experiences in bathrooms associated with their biological sex.
With a deeper appreciation of their experience, you may find additional motivation to invest in creative solutions.
Approach marriage wisely
Public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders
Bathrooms
Sleeping spaces on teen trips – avoid same-sex sleeping arrangements when possible, be creative and compassionate 
Policies: sleeping arrangements

[Notes]
And fourth, wisdom for sleeping spaces on teen trips

Most trans people don't want to sleep in a space with people of the opposite sex (or the same sex).
More often than not, they prefer privacy away from both people of the same sex and people of the opposite sex.
If possible, avoid same-sex sleeping arrangements.

This will also accommodate gay teens, teens struggling with body shame,
or teens who are uncomfortable undressing around other people for a variety of reasons.

When shared sleeping areas cannot be avoided, modesty rules may reduce anxiety for a range of teens.

In addition, a trans student could stay in a private room close to shared sleeping areas, stay with leaders,
or offer for the student to commute.

Different teens will prefer different solutions.

The key is to communicate with the teen about what solutions make them comfortable,
so they can focus on the much more important intention of the trip:
enjoying Christian fellowship and deepening their relationship with Christ.

It’s important to note that if you offer for a trans teen to stay in a shared sleeping place with teens of the opposite sex,
you would do well to inform students and parents appropriately (after discussion and permission from the trans teen),
as to avoid controversy of withholding that information only for it to be discovered later.

QUESTIONS
Regardless of gender incongruence, what resources could you recommend inside and outside of your church for individuals navigating mental illness?
What steps could your church take to undo arbitrary culture prescription/stereotypes?
What resistance do you feel to using preferred names and pronouns?

[Notes]
Okay, I’ve done a lot of talking.
Take some time to review your notes, and then reflect individually or with others on the following questions:
1. Regardless of gender incongruence, what resources could you recommend inside and outside of your church for individuals navigating mental illness?
2. What steps could your church take to undo arbitrary culture prescription/stereotypes?
3. What resistance do you feel to using preferred names and pronouns?




SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories & Terminology
2. The Bible + Theology
3. Culture & Pastoral Care
4. Kids & Case Studies


[Notes]
That concludes our third session
In the next session, we’ll zoom in on caring for kids and teens who share about incongruence, and then we’ll conclude our sessions with a series of case studies spanning a range of scenarios you might encounter

Thanks for your time and willingness to lean into this conversation for the sake of offering God’s love and wisdom to trans* people
I hope you’ll jump back in with our fourth session soon!

