Navigating Gender Incongruence &Caring for Trans* People

[Notes]
Welcome back to “Navigating Gender Incongruence & Caring for Trans* People” with Equip.
I’m Jesse White, Equip’s Trans* Content Specialist.
The goal of these sessions is to equip Christian leaders and parents to think wisely and empathetically about gender incongruence.
And to help Christian leaders and parents offer God’s love and wisdom to those navigating gender incongruence and to trans* people,
while those Christian leaders and parents challenge their churches to grow their capacity to support trans* people in compassionate and theologically accurate ways

Last session we heard the stories of people navigating gender incongruence and grounded our conversation in shared terminology
SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories & Terminology
2. The Bible + Theology
3. Culture & Pastoral Care
4. Kids & Case Studies


[Notes]
This session, we’ll examine passages of Scripture often cited in conversations about gender ethics and we’ll share how Equip invites Christian leaders and pastors to think theologically about ministering to trans* people

In our third session, we’ll survey alternate Christian and non-Christian perspectives on gender ethics and share how you can better care for those navigating gender incongruence in your churches and families

And finally, in our fourth session, we’ll zoom in on caring for kids and teens who share about incongruence, and then we’ll conclude our sessions with a series of case studies spanning a range of scenarios you might encounter


Remember, sex and gender…
Sex—Being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—Psychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity

[Notes]
Remember, we’re using the words sex and gender in specific and different ways.

A person’s sex (male or female) is defined by his or her chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics.
These include the presence or absence of a Y chromosome, internal reproductive organs, external sexual anatomy,
and endocrine systems that produce secondary sex characteristics.

When I refer to someone’s gender, I am referring to the pychological, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female including gender identity
(how you experience yourself and how masculine/feminine a person feels) and gender role (adoptions of cultural expectations for males/females). 



Gender incongruence, trans*
Gender Incongruence – An acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex

Transgender/Trans* – A general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence

[Notes]
When I use the phrase ”gender incongruence”, I’m referring to an acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex.

When I use the word ”transgender” or shortened to “trans” with an asterisk, I’m referring to a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence.
To be clear, when I use the word trans to refer to someone, I’m not communicating anything about their theological convictions or the extent to which they have transitioned.
I am merely using that word to refer to a person who is navigating gender incongruence.
I’ll use those words and phrases most commonly and interchangeably.



Femaleness, maleness, femininity, and masculinity 
Femaleness/Maleness – the nature of being biologically female or biologically male

Femininity/Masculinity – a person’s sense of being a woman/man and cultural expectations for how women/men will express their gender

[Notes]
When I say “Femaleness/Maleness,” I’m referring to the nature of being biologically female or biologically male.

When I say “Masculinity/Femininity,” I’m referring to a person’s sense of being a woman or being a man and cultural expectations for how men and women will express their gender. Cultural expectations can and often are different between different regions in the same nation, between different nations, and between generations.


THE BIBLE & GENDER

[Notes]
So what does the bible have to say about gender and gender incongruence?
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
The Bible contains everything necessary and sufficient for salvation.

Almost nothing directly about gender incongruence, but some meaningful passages about biological sex and gender expression.

[Notes]
The Bible promises to contain everything necessary and sufficient for salvation,
but God did not intend for the Bible to provide Christians with the answers to every question they might have about the Christian’s life.

There is almost nothing the Bible says directly about gender incongruence,
but there are several passages that address biological sex and gender expression that can serve as building blocks for a faithful response to gender incongruence.

It should be noted here that passages on gender expression are typically addressing specific cultural norms and practices within the biblical context,
and should be adapted (with wisdom and discernment) to our current cultural context.

I’m going to walk through 10 passages and 3 related questions about Scripture. To cover that many items, I can’t dive as deeply into each as some might want.
I encourage you to do your own research with each of these.
The full scripture references for each will be in your handout.
For each, I will briefly summarize the relevant content, and then I’ll briefly share what, if anything, might be applicable to building a theology of gender incongruence.
Genesis 1-3
God intended for us to bear His image, including through sexual difference.

The author of Genesis likely meant to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.

[Notes]
So first, Genesis 1-3 narrates creation, including that of Adam and Eve.
Importantly, God creates humans male and female, in His image, suggesting there is a sacred integrity to maleness and femaleness.
While biological sex difference between Adam and Eve was only one of the ways they reflected the diverse complexity of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church,
our bodies (including our given biological sex) are essential to bearing God’s image.
God intended for us to bear His image.
Interestingly, the Hebrew words for male and female are the same words used to describe the paired animals included in the ark to repopulate the world after the flood,
suggesting that central to God’s design for humans was their complementary reproductive capacities given by their biological sex.
As image-bearers, God created us each with a unique body that represents His craftsmanship and care that he puts into our physical being.
It is important to note that while common translations use the words “male and female”,
the original text did not assume a duality between sex and gender or intend to narrowly communicate about biological sex.
We can assume that the authors of Scripture meant to these words to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.
Deuteronomy 22:5
Primarily focused on separation from the surrounding cultures and being “set apart” for the Lord. 

Crossdressing was a practice in Canaanite religious rituals used to worship their gods.

[Notes]
Deuteronomy 22:5 forbids crossdressing.
Along with most of the law, this prohibitions is primarily focused on separation from the surrounding cultures and being “set apart” for the Lord.
There were parts of the law that focused on bodily cleanliness, holiness regarding moral actions that involved treatment of creation,
and physical representations of being set apart such as eating restrictions and not mixing different fabrics in clothing.
In this context, crossdressing was a practice in Canaanite religious rituals used to worship their gods via fornication across gender bounds.
So this command is particularly concerned with preventing morally corrupt behavior that would draw the Israelites away from God.






Deuteronomy 23:1
Eunuchs were excluded from the people of Israel under Mosaic Law because of ritual uncleanness.

But this separation is resolved in Acts 8 with the baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch.

[Notes]
Most commonly, eunuchs were men who were castrated, and therefore, sterile and often unable to participate in sexual intercourse.
There were many reasons this was done to people: Sometimes people became eunuchs ceremonially so that they could serve in pagan religious practices.
Other times people captured in war were forced to become eunuchs so they could serve in the royal court of a foreign nation.
People were made eunuchs to be used as sex slaves.
And sometimes people were made eunuchs just to punish, humiliate, inflict pain, control, or subjugate.

As a result, eunuchs were excluded from the people of Israel under Mosaic Law.
In Deuteronomy 23:1, it was commanded that eunuchs were to be kept from worship services because they were unclean and unworthy to worship God with the people of Israel:
if worship is a living sacrifice of our bodies to God, then the worship of a eunuch was unworthy because the sacrifice was physically defective.

However, we eventually see this separation resolved in Acts 8 with the baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch.
Isaiah 56:1-5
Historically understood as promise of family, belonging, and honor to faithful celibates without children.

Doesn’t contradict Old Testament statement that genital mutilation is marring of God’s gift of one’s biological sex.

[Notes]
In contrast to the exclusion of eunuchs found in Deuteronomy 23:1, Isaiah 56 promises the eunuch family, belonging, and honor:
Instead of being excluded from Jewish worship, they will be included “within the walls of my house.”
Instead of being forgotten and lost to history because they had no children, they will be remembered in a way greater than “sons and daughters could give.”
Instead of being humiliated, they will be honored.
Instead of rejected, welcomed. Instead of being exploited, cherished.
Instead of being viewed and treated primarily by the nature of their brokenness, they will be named as a child of God because God will call out the His Image found at the core of their person. 

But these promises aren't just for literal eunuchs, or even primarily for eunuchs.

Isaiah is a book of poetic prophecy, so the use of the word eunuch here has historically been understood as a promise particularly to celibate people without children.
This passage has not been historically understood to contradict the Old Testament statement that genital mutilation is marring of God’s gift of one’s biological sex.





Matthew 19:3-12
“Eunuch” is used as a metaphor to express the permanence of the kind of singleness Jesus is inviting his disciples to consider.

[Notes]
Here, Jesus is addressing the particulars of marriage and divorce,
taking it a step further and stating that divorce was permitted by Moses but it was never seen as a right or allowance from God who set a high bar for marriage.

In the same vein, singleness, or “eunuchhood,” has an equally high bar,
and those who are able to accept either singleness/celibacy or marriage must do so knowing and understanding the weight and cost that comes with both relational vocations.

Eunuch here is used as a metaphor to express the permanence of the kind of singleness he’s inviting his disciples to consider,
 and the ways that singleness is meant to be in single-minded devotion to the King and building the King’s kingdom.



Matthew 22:30
This passage has historically been understood to suggest that there will be no romance, marriage, sex, or bearing of new children in heaven.

There is no reason to assume that heaven will be a place without biological sex or gender.

[Notes]
While this passage has historically been understood to suggest that there will be no romance, marriage, sex, or bearing of new children in heaven,
there is no reason to assume that heaven will be a place without biological sex or gender.

We know that the New Heavens and New Earth will be a physical city where we will live and worship in resurrected bodies.

While the capacity for sex and procreation is a meaningful aspect of biological sexual differences,
there are many other ways that the biological and social difference between men and women image the diversity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

Therefore, we could expect that biological sex and gender will persist in the next life, but perhaps in different ways than we currently experience them.



Acts 8:25-39
Fulfillment and removal of law that prohibited the Ethiopian eunuch from being in the presence of the Lord.

Genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family.

[Notes]
Here in Acts 8, we see a fulfillment and removal of the law that would have prohibited the Ethiopian eunuch from being in the presence of the Lord.

We see his recognition of the Lord’s authority and desire for immediate baptism through his interaction with Philip.

This points to the radical nature of who Jesus is, that even the ritual uncleanliness connected to genital mutilation,
does not prevent people from being able to image God nor from being brought into his family.

To be clear, this passage does not explore the origins of the eunuch’s castration or suggest that his castration was a morally neutral act.

Yet despite that mutilation (by whomever made him a eunuch), he is fully welcomed into God’s family.



1 Corinthians 6:12-20
Our physical bodies are given by God and created uniquely, but sometimes we steward those unfaithfully.

Thankfully, each of us can bear God’s image even if we or others have sinned against our body.

[Notes]
A popular passage that is used to address a wide variety of topics is this one about our bodies being holy temples for the Lord.
For the purpose of this conversation, we’re going to focus specifically on how our physical bodies are given by God and created uniquely.
We are called to steward what we are given by God and sometimes, we choose to do things with our bodies that do not faithfully steward what he has given us.

This includes sexual sins, abuse, harsh language, self-harm, gluttony with food and drink, drug addictions, and many other ways we sin against our bodies or others. 
However, through grace, we can continue being faithful stewards even when we sin or are sinned against through our bodies.

We also have a hope that though we live in a broken world with broken bodies, we will be given a heavenly body one day that is glorified and perfect.
Does this mean we do what we want with our bodies here on earth? Certainly not.

It does mean that we are to use our bodies to glorify and represent Christ as best as we can on this earth.
What that looks like may be different for everyone and should be done prayerfully in healthy community that will spur you on towards Him.





1 Corinthians 11:2-16
Affirms complementary gender expression by males/females, but standards are culturally-bound.

Who determines standards in the US today? A person’s pastor? A popular public theologian? A particular denomination? The pope?

[Notes]
Corinthians 11:2-16 explores standards for gender expression.

These standards were, in part, a response to cross-dressing practices in cult prostitution,
and many have understood Paul’s words to condemn the intention to deceive another about one’s biological sex.

At a minimum, this passage affirms complementary gender expression by males and females,
recognizing that men and women are different and that that difference should be honored in public.

Few, though, would suggest that modern Christians must follow the specific standards described in this passage.
And none would suggest that there is one, universal standard for how male and female Christians in all places and all times should properly display their maleness and femaleness.

Most would recognize that since God intended gender-differentiated expression, those standards will be culturally-bound and different for different people in different times and places.

Which humans, then, determine those standards for each time and place? A person’s pastor? A particular denomination? A popular public theologian? The pope?

As this line of questioning suggests, in pluralistic and ecumenical societies like the modern United States of America,
identifying who has the authority to prescribe standards for gender expression may be impossible, and local leaders should hesitate to take up that authority.

At the very least, Christian leaders can employ this passage to discourage expression that is intended to mislead an observer about the biological sex of the individual.

That being said, intent cannot be assumed based on surface level interactions.
To know someone’s true intent, we must first know the person and remember that intentions can and often do change over time. 



Galatians 3:27-28
Paul is not advocating for the removal of gender altogether.

He is advocating for equality and unity within the body of Christ.

[Notes]
Here, Paul is not advocating for the removal of gender altogether.
Rather, he is advocating for equality and unity within the body of Christ.
This is meant to be a unifying factor regardless of gender, social status, age, or ethnicity.
This is a hard truth for many to accept, that all are welcome into the family of God no matter the background.

The last three slides in this section will address three broader questions about Scripture and gender.



What is the biblical precedent for name change?
God changes the names of Abram, Sarai, Jacob, Simon, and Saul; confirmed by community
Some referred to as both, some reminders of brokenness
No evidence of biblical characters renaming themselves

[Notes]
First, what is the biblical precedent for name change?

In Genesis 17 God changes Abram and Sarai’s names to Abraham and Sarah, their new names meaning “father of a multitude” and “mother of nations”.
In Genesis 32 God gives Jacob a new name, from “supplanter” to Israel, meaning “wrestles with God”.
In Matthew 16 Jesus gives Simon a new name, calling him instead Peter to refer to the way the disciple will serve as key leader in the early Church.
After Saul’s conversion in Acts 9, he is referred to by his Latin name, Paul.

There are other name changes in Scripture, but among these prominent name changes there are meaningful similarities and differences.
First, whenever a person’s name is truly changed, God changes their name in an undeniable way to the family of God.
And second, the person’s is given a new name to signify a new vocation to serve God in a particular way.
But there are also differences.
Saul/Paul is not an actual name change.
Jacob/Israel continues to be referred to as both.
And it should be noted that both of Jacob’s names are reminders of hardship and brokenness.

How then might these name changes apply to trans* people adopting new names?
First, based on the treatment of Jacob/Israel, it’d be difficult to argue that God gives people new names to leave behind reminders of brokenness.
Second, new names are given by God, not the individual.
And third, if a person claims God has given them a new name, God’s work of naming would need to be verified by the community.

While adopting new names may be morally neutral depending on the motivations for doing so,
there is little biblical evidence to support the claim that a Christian can biblically rename themselves or unilaterally assert that God has given them a new name.
This doesn’t mean the opposite is true—that changing one’s name is necessarily a sin.
It just means that name changes in the Bible aren’t meaningful support for trans* people changing their names to reduce distress related to their gender incongruence.

As we’ll explore further in future sections, discerning a potential name change should be done prayerfully in Christian community.
Unfortunately, most trans* people lack a Christian community where they would feel safe to invite others into this discernment.
Names are a powerful aspect of our identities and as we see in Scripture, the process of changing them should not be taken lightly. 
Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?
Roman emperor Elagabalus cross-dressed and gave himself in marriage as a wife
Cult practices to Ishtar included cross-dressing; similar in Phrygia w/ castration
Ovid wrote about gods granting Iphis a wish to be transformed from girl to boy

[Notes]
Interestingly, biblical authors were aware of individuals who were biologically one sex but presented as someone of the opposite sex,
and they were aware of individuals whose sexual anatomy had been surgically altered.

The Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) dressed as a woman when trying to entice men, worked in brothels as a woman,
and dressed as a bride and gave himself away as a wife when he married a male slave.

Ancient Mesopotomaian cult practices included biological men whose “appearance either was feminine or had both male and female characteristics,”
corresponding to a deity named Ishtar who was known for blurring gender expression.

Similar cult practices were seen in Phrygia where men were castrated, dressed as women, and played feminine roles in society.

Just before the events of the New Testament, Ovid wrote about a biological girl named Iphis whose mother raised her as a boy.
Iphis finds herself attracted to women, asks the gods to transform her into a male, and her wish is granted.
When did men and women in the Bible break gender stereotypes?
Men in the Bible
Weeping: Psalm 51:10-11
Tenderheartedness: Micah 6:8
Physical/emotional connections: 1 Samuel 18:1-3




Women in the Bible
Cunning & entrepreneurial: Proverbs 31
Strong leaders: Judges 4:4
Wealthy+learned: Acts 16:14

[Notes]
The Bible is full of examples of men and women breaking gender stereotypes.

Throughout the Bible, men are called to exemplify and reflect emotional states such as weeping in Psalm 51:10-11, tenderheartedness in Micah 6:8,
and sensitivity to those around them, keeping peace, and showing deep affection for others through their physical and emotional connections in I Samuel 18:1-3.

Women also break many stereotypes.
Proverbs 31 pictures a cunning, entrepreneurial businesswoman who works hard to provide for her family,
and both the Old and New Testaments contain examples such as Deborah, Lydia, Rahab, and Ruth and Naomi,
along with many other wealthy women that helped support Jesus’ ministry.

Jesus Himself broke stereotypes by daring to associate with “sinful women’’ in Luke 7:47,50,
and He even revealed His deity for the first time to the Samaritan woman at the well who would have been seen as the lowest of the low.
In summary…

The bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing in cult practices, & elimination of gender difference. The bible affirms sex/gender binary.

The bible also welcomes the eunuch into God’s family & affirms dozens of times when people in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.

[Notes]
In summary, the Bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, and the elimination of gender difference.
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
But the Bible also makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family.
And the Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.
QUESTIONS
What assumptions did you come into this session with about what the Bible says directly about modern trans* people and gender incongruence?
To what extent were you surprised by the limited direct reference to believers hoping to faithfully navigate unchosen gender incongruence?
Does the evidence in Scripture feel like “enough” to know God’s wisdom for trans* Christians today?

[Notes]
We’ve covered a lot in this session.
Take some time to review your notes, and then reflect individually or with others on the following questions:
What assumptions did you come into this session with about what the Bible says directly about modern trans* people and gender incongruence?
To what extent were you surprised by the limited direct reference to believers hoping to faithfully navigating unchosen gender incongruence?
Does the evidence in Scripture feel like “enough” to know God’s wisdom for trans* Christians today?

















THEOLOGY & GENDER

[Notes]
So, considering each of these passages, their relevance to gender incongruence, and broader theological principles,
how would we at Equip invite Christian leaders and parents to think theologically about ministering to trans* people?
Don’t forget to check out the full notes from this session for Scripture references related to this section.
What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 
God made us in His image to enjoy connection with God + each other and to embody diversity + complementarity.

Marriage, gender, and biological sex are just a few of the ways that Christians relate and bear God’s image.

[Notes]
What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 

Well, we see in the Scriptures that God is a being-in-relation in the Trinity, delighting in communion with the other members of the Trinity.
And there is diversity and complementarity in the Trinity.
Then God created humankind in His image to also be beings-in-relation to each other, to desire communion with God and others, and to be diverse and complementary.
There are many ways in which humans interact as beings-in-relation, and there are many sources of diversity and complementarity in the Body of Christ.
 
One source of diversity and complementarity is biological sex and gender,
and one way that humankind interact as male and female beings-in-relation is marriage.

Eve was made from Adam in such a way that Adam and Eve complemented each other (however, in more ways than just their sexuality),
for God saw that it was not good for a human to be alone.
However, marriage is not the only way males and females can express connection and community with one another.
John lays out a level of familial bonds that exceeds biological relations when, at the cross John 19:26 says,
“Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, ‘Woman, behold, your son!’”
We see in Jesus’s ministry the love that He has for His twelve disciples but also the connections and relationships He has with the women who follow His ministry, such as Mary and Martha. 

Additionally, biological sex and gender are not the only ways that humans image the diversity and complementarity in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.
As we’ll explore more later, there is actually more diversity among males and separately among females than between the average male and the average female.
That doesn’t mean to suggest that biological sex and gender don’t matter, but merely to recognize that the diversity from other sources is collectively greater.
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.

God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us. 

[Notes]
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?

Well, at the very least, sex and gender are important.
Theologians have consistently and narrowly defined faithfulness to our biological maleness or femaleness as:
First, accepting our biological maleness or femaleness philosophically.
That means recognizing in our mind (and later with our words and actions) that we are indeed biologically male or biologically female,
And then second, recognizing our potential for friendship and marriage as biologically sexed people and following God’s wisdom as we engage those capacities.

This also highlights the ways that a person can reject his or her biological sex:
First, by rejecting their biological maleness or femaleness outright. Rejection could be in our mind, through our words, or with our actions.
And then second, Christians can rejection our biological sex by engaging in sex outside of Christian marriage.

However, God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for males or females.
God didn’t communicate any further intentions about universal masculinity or femininity.
He seems to have expected and even invited humans, with our authority and responsibility to care for and rule over Creation,
to create beautiful cultures and to express our differences within those patterns of masculine and feminine expression.

As such, man-made gender prescriptions do not have moral weight and frequently change from generation to generation and culture to culture.
We can recognize the variety and differences within humans as created image bearers and celebrate the ways in which our differences can uniquely glorify God. 

How is gender broken biologically and culturally?
Unfortunately, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders.

As such, most biblical examples of what it means to be male/female are imperfect.

[Notes]
Unfortunately, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. 

When God first imagined each of us, He created us to be perfect in every way, including our biological sex and gender.
But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin. 
Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our biological sex and gender.
We should not be surprised, then, when we find our the ways our bodies, minds, and spirits experience and express our sex and gender to be broken.
As in the case of the thorn in Paul’s side, being faithful Christians doesn’t mean that God resolves all our brokenness in this lifetime.

This highlights another reason why the Scriptures provide limited wisdom for universal maleness/femaleness and masculinity/femininity:
When we search the Bible for prescriptions about perfect maleness and femaleness, we are only provided with perfect examples in the Garden of Eden before the Fall,
in prophecy about the New Heaven and the New Earth, and in Jesus.
Beyond that, we are provided with examples in the context of a broken world.
Because most examples we have of what it means to be male or female are imperfect,
it is difficult to prescribe what correct gender experience and expression is beyond those previously described:
to accept one’s biological maleness or femaleness, to follow God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship, and to refrain from rejecting biological maleness or femaleness.

Furthermore, if everything in this world is broken, then our cultural understanding of gender is also broken…
How is cultural gender broken?
When we’ve arbitrarily assigned preference to one gender or another, how much distress and confusion have we caused our children?

All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender. Resist opportunities to arbitrarily assign preferences.

[Notes]
Here’s the problem with our cultural definitions of gender:

Is pink a girl color? Is blue a boy color?
100 years ago, pink was considered the more masculine color because of its resemblance to red, and blue was considered dainty.
By the 1970s, children wore mostly gender-neutral clothing and there was no sense of colors being associated with one gender or another.

But once science allowed parents to learn a child’s sex long before birth,
retailers sought to increase sales by marketing higher-priced, gender-differentiated clothes, blankets, and toys so that parents would spend more money preparing a baby’s room,
including differentiating these items by color.

Our society has attributed some colors to one gender or another despite colors preferences being unrelated to gender.
 
Yet the impact of these arbitrary gender prescriptions can be much worse than inflated prices.
What happens when we ascribe something to gender that has nothing to do with gender?
Say a boy prefers the color pink: pink toys, pink clothing, pink blankets.
Parents often respond with a forced choice for the child: either reject your preference for pink and choose to be a boy, or continue to prefer pink and experience shame.
How much distress and confusion is caused by ascribing gender to preferences that have nothing to do with gender at all?
How much shame and rejection do these forced choices create in children?
Could these feelings lead a child to question whether they’re really a boy or really a girl?

All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender.
We would do well to resist opportunities to assign preferences to one gender or another.
To be clear, we’re not trying to deconstruct gender.
Instead, we hope to purge God’s intentions for gender of aspects that have nothing to do with gender so that the true nature of gender may be appreciated.
How should Christians respond to broken sex and gender?

The bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing in cult practices, & elimination of gender difference. The bible affirms sex/gender binary.

The bible also welcomes the eunuch into God’s family & affirms dozens of times when people in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.

[Notes]
So God made us male or female.
We’re called to honor God’s gift of our maleness and femaleness.
Yet God chose not to define gender much further.
Instead, He left humans to create beautiful cultures and to express our differentness in lots of ways, including through cultural patterns of gender expression.
But, the Fall has impacted everything, including our biological sexes, our genders, and our cultural definitions of gender.

How, then, should Christians faithfully respond to that brokenness?

Well, as we’ve surveyed, the Bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, and the elimination of gender difference.
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
But the Bible also makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family.
And the Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.

So how should Christians think wisely about the particular expression of broken gender that is gender incongruence?
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
Concerned with what actions are sins
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
First, we need a way to appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence.

Christian psychologist Mark Yarhouse has suggested that there are three lenses through which Christian can view and seek to understand gender incongruence:
the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.
 
The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of gender incongruence and how Christians respond. Generally, when the Christian uses the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask, “What actions are sins? What actions are seemingly morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?” If a Christian seeks to understand gender incongruence exclusively through the integrity lens, the Christian should primarily explore whether different steps of social, hormonal, and surgical transition are sins or not.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
Recognize enduring physical brokenness and call on the Church to care for trans* people
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people. When Christians view gender incongruence through the disability lens, they recognize that gender incongruence is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world, but those navigating gender incongruence do not choose to experience incongruence nor is there a reliable method for eliminating gender incongruence. Christians seeking to understand gender incongruence through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches to care for trans people with God’s love and wisdom as those trans people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens
Celebrating unique testimonies, gifts, and strengths faithful trans* Christians develop (and offer the Church) from submitting to God’s wisdom

[Notes]
The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ. When Christians who hold a progressive gender ethic view gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they see the trans experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God. However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they ask how Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ particularly from stewarding their brokenness (while recognizing that God did not intend gender incongruence or for gender incongruence to image God).
As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand gender incongruence through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate. Like a kaleidoscope, we appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence when we stack all three lenses on top of each other and seek to understand gender incongruence through them simultaneously. There are simultaneously moral questions, an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence with the support they need to thrive, and an opportunity to recognize and appreciate the spiritual gifts trans Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus. If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses, we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses, with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens. This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating gender incongruence to do so faithfully.
Key theological questions:
How does gender incongruence develop?
Was it God’s intention? Does it change?
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can faithful trans* Christians take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
With this understanding of gender incongruence, here’s some key theological questions that we need to answer:
How does gender incongruence develop?
Was it God’s intention? Can it change?
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?


How does gender incongruence develop? Was is God’s intention?
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown.

God didn’t intend gender incongruence. He intended for each to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman.

[Notes]
First: How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God's intention? Can it change? 
Like many things in life, gender incongruence develops from a combination of genetic and biological factors (nature) as well as cultural and familial influences (nurture).
No one study points to a particular reason or source for why gender incongruence happens.
For most people, it is a combination of multiple factors that are typically experienced from an early age.

Second, God did not intend for anyone to experience gender incongruence.
When God first imagined each of us being born into a perfect world,
He intended for each of us to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman.

When God creates humans in Genesis 1 and 2, He creates them mind, body, and spirit as male-bodied men and female-bodied women.
We can assume that pre-fall, there was complete congruence between mind, body, and spirit, and therefore, between biological sex and felt gender.
That being said, it's true that Scripture never states explicitly that God intended every person pre-fall to be male-bodied men or female-bodied women.
Similar to much of orthodoxy in historic Christianity, the Church has discerned with the Holy Spirit and through dialogue in the body of Christ further clarity needed for day-to-day life.

But because everything in this world is broken, one of the ways some people were impacted by that brokenness is that they developed gender incongruence.
Does it change? Is there a formula for increasing likelihood of change?
No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence.

While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

[Notes]
But we want to be clear: no one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence.
And while some may experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.
Let me explain.

Interestingly, 80% of people who experience gender incongruence as a child experience relief from their gender incongruence by adulthood.
It just goes away. Not because the child or their parents do any particular thing.
They just get through puberty, and everything feels like it fits.
However in about 20% of cases, gender incongruence persists.

But there’s no proven combination of counseling or pastoral care strategies or spiritual exercises to increase the likelihood of a person’s gender incongruence resolving.
If an individual sees gender incongruence persisting beyond adolescence and into adulthood, it is likely going to be a lifelong experience.
To be clear, resolved incongruence does not mean that the child’s gender incongruence was ingenuine or that the child was merely confused.
And it’s important to note that there is also no way to know for sure if gender incongruence will resolve,
and as such, the experience should not be dismissed regardless of the age of the person experiencing incongruence.
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.

All are broken. God can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power. 

[Notes]
Next, if God didn’t intend for anyone to experience gender incongruence, then what is it?

Gender incongruence is a brokenness and one of many manifestations of the brokenness of all of creation as a result of the Fall.
Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.

Gender incongruence, just like other forms of pain and brokenness,  may tempt a person to soothe their discomfort in sinful ways,
or attempt to sinfully remake God’s gift of their biological sex,
but a person does not sin until they say “yes” to temptation in thought, word, or deed.
And still, we should be quick to remember that even when we sin intentionally or unintentionally, grace abounds more through Jesus Christ. 

Every person experiences brokenness in one way or another, and because we all experience the hurt and pain that are byproducts of this brokenness,
we as believers should be driven to show love and compassion.

Certainly, in an ideal world people would not experience gender incongruence.
Yet the beauty of God and His power is that our brokenness does not keep us from His love and grace because of His son, Jesus Christ.
He can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power. 
KEY QUESTION:If someone experiences gender incongruence, what determines who they are? Why?

[Notes]
So, based on relevant passages of Scripture and the theological understanding we explored so far, if someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?

Well, when a Christian asks, “Who am I, fundamentally? Who did God create me to be? How does God see me?” the individual is asking a question of ontology.
Then, the Christian’s appreciation for God’s intentions should guide how they faithfully respond to the broken world they experience.
As we’ve already stated, when God first imagined each of us born unblemished into a perfect world, He imagined each of us as either male-bodied men or female-bodied women.
But we live in a broken world, and some experience a distressing incongruence between their biological sex and felt gender.

Which reflects God’s intentions? Which is broken? And how then should the trans Christian faithfully manage that brokenness?


KEY QUESTION: Who am I?
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.

Unfortunately, the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions.

[Notes]
If an individual is not intersex and their chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics all indicate the same biological sex,
then we can see God’s intentions for the individual’s biological sex.

Plus, when God’s intentions for an individual’s biological sex are evident, we can also see His intentions for their experience of their gender.
So when a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we believe that their biological sex is as God intended but their experience of their gender is broken.
We know that God intended to gift them with a particular biological sex and gender, and we believe that their experience of their gender has been negatively impacted by the Fall. 
For example, if a person is biologically male,
then God intended for that person to be biologically male and feel mentally/psychologically like a man.

If this male experiences gender incongruence and, as such, does not feel robustly like a man and instead feels more like a woman or somewhere in between a man and a woman,.
we can recognize that their experience of gender has been negatively impacted by the brokenness of Creation caused by sin.

We know that God intended to offer this male his maleness and a sense of being a man as a sacred gift,
but unfortunately the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions for the male’s gender.
Are our brains sexed? Could many trans* people have a brain-sex/body-sex difference, be considered intersex, and God's intentions for their sex and gender therefore be unknown?
What about brain-sex / body-sex difference?

[Notes]
Now some might push back on the previous claim by asserting that most people actually experience a brain-sex/body-sex difference, and as such should be treated as intersex people.
Let’s explore that.

Before diving into that, I want to emphasize that this can be a difficult and often painful topic to address for trans* individuals, especially teens.
I also want to acknowledge that this particular conversation will look different for intersex persons, but should be addressed gently and compassionately regardless. Okay, so, in recent years, queer theorists have suggested that the brains of males and females are categorically different in ways that determine their experience of their gender.
The brain develops much earlier in the mother’s womb than the rest of the body, and male brains are exposed to a hormone bath of testosterone that female brains are not.

As a result, theorists have suggested that a primary source of a trans experience could be a brain-sex body-sex difference,
where a biological male develops a male body but for some reason develops the brain of a female.

Because the brain and the rest of the body develop at different times in a mother’s womb,
it is hypothetically possible that an atypical hormone bath during brain development could cause it to develop contrary to its genetic material.

If such a brain-sex/body-sex difference were discovered among trans people, one could argue that those trans people are actually intersex.

And as we have already discussed, God’s intention for the sex of an intersex person is not clear,
so the wisdom for how the intersex Christian should faithfully steward their gender would be less clear.
Are our brains sexed, then? And could a meaningful number of trans people have a brain-sex/body-sex difference?
Available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans* people as intersex.

Research has shown that the variation among male brains and among female brains is greater than the differences between the average male and female brain.
What about brain-sex / body-sex difference?

[Notes]
Well, limited studies have been conducted to explore this theory.
The results of some suggest that trans people have brains more similar to people of the opposite sex.
Other studies show that trans people have brains more similar to people of the same sex.

Moreover, the studies that found trans people to have brains more similar to people of the opposite sex either suffered from a small sample size,
surveyed participants who had already taken cross-sex hormones, studied participants with HIV/AIDS,
or followed participants who had already lived for years as someone of the opposite sex.

In short, the credibility of those studies is widely doubted.

In contrast, studies of biological females who received a wash of testosterone in utero found that while they were more likely to report masculine-typical behaviors and interests,
they were not more likely to identify as male or experience gender dysphoria.

A further analysis of gender identity and prenatal hormone exposure found that prenatal androgens had “large effects on interests and engagements in gendered activities,
moderate effects on spatial abilities; and relatively small or no effects on gender identity, gender cognitions, and gendered peer involvement.”
In conclusion, available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex (and therefore leave God’s intentions for their biological sex unclear).
In contrast, consistent research has shown that while there are physical differences on average between male and female brains,
the variation among male brains and among female brains are greater than the differences between the average male and female brain.

This variance is natural, but does not predict gender incongruence or make a person any more or less male or female. God created us each uniquely and beautifully.
Our differences and our commonalities reflect God’s handiwork and His intentionality with us.
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
Based on all of this, we get to our final and admittedly most difficult theological question:
What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

First, let me describe steps that a person could take in three different ranges: social transitioning, hormonal transitioning, and surgical transitioning
Social transitioning can include name and/or pronoun changes, clothing, hairstyle, wrapping/taping, packing, bathroom use, voice training, etc.
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
Social transitioning involves taking steps within one’s social circles to mitigate incongruence non-medically.
These include name and/or pronoun changes,
adjustments to one’s appearance through clothing and hairstyle changes,
wrapping/taping to flatten the chest,
packing to give the appearance of having a bulge,
using single stall bathrooms,
using the bathroom of people of the opposite sex,
and voice training to raise or lower the pitch of one’s voice. 



What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning involves chemically altering secondary sex characteristics to align with gender identity
Surgical transitioning

[Notes]
Hormonal transitioning involves the use of Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) that chemically alters a person’s secondary sex characteristics to align with their gender identity.
There are two main approaches: Masculinizing hormone therapy for transgender men consists of androgens and antiestrogens.
Feminizing hormone therapy for transgender women consists of estrogens and antiandrogens.



Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning includes breasts augmentation, change facial features, vocal cord surgeries, and/or altering genitalia
What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
Even today, surgical transitioning is the riskiest aspect of transitioning.
It can include adding or removing breasts, various forms of plastic surgery to change facial features or enhance other parts of the body, vocal cord surgeries, and altering genitalia.
The most common terms associated with surgical transitioning is “top” (think top half of the body) and “bottom” (refers exclusively to genital alterations) surgery. 

Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) is a sin.

Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
So to what extent is each of these ranges of transition morally neutral or a sin?

Well, if a person who experiences gender incongruence is not intersex, if we know God’s intentions for the individual’s sex and gender,
and if we know that the person’s gender experience is broken whereas their sex is as God intended,
then taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex can be sinful.

When a trans* Christian undergoes hormonal or surgical transition,
they are at risk of responding to broken gender by breaking their biological sex and not being grateful for God’s gift of their sex and faithfully managing their broken gender.
However, in the range of steps considered social transition, the morality of many of those actions depends on the motivation behind the action.
Few of them are inherently sinful.

Each step of social transition could be taken as part of a rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex,
or each step of social transition could be taken merely to reduce the distress of a person’s gender incongruence,
while affirming internally and externally that they are ontologically the biological sex that God intended.
Transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.

What will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender? 
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
Some might say, “Transition saves lives.”
“Inviting trans Christians to consider the moral implications of transition will only lead to more suicide. The risk of suicide is reason enough to set aside God’s wisdom.”
But, as we’ve already noted, scientific evidence suggest that transition does not effectively reduce suicide risk.
Earlier, a trans Christian seeking to faithfully steward their sex and gender was offered as the point of reference.
In an ideal world, a trans Christian would consider the moral implications of transition from a place of positive mental health, a robust relationship with Jesus,
compassionate church discipleship, and robust support from friends and family. Unfortunately, this has rarely been the case.

Many have taken steps to transition in times of mental unhealth, before knowing Jesus, after leaving the Christian faith, without compassionate support,
and/or amid harassment from people who call themselves Christians.

When offering discipleship to trans people, as will be covered later with greater nuance,
conversations about the morality of social/medical transition will rarely be a first or early conversation in pastoral care that imitates Christ’s love. 
Additionally, just because someone chooses to medically transition does not remove their ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
We all make sinful decisions that affect our lives in significant ways, yet we also know that God takes our sin and brokenness and redeems it for His glory and our good.
Finally, any conversation about the morality of transition and the steps trans people take to address their distress isn’t complete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century.

Christians have overprescribed gender roles and rules, creating (in part) gender incongruence in some instances and amplifying gender incongruence in other instances.

While conservative advocates might accuse progressive advocates of Gnosticism by falling into mind/body dualism and valuing the mind over the body,
it could equally be argued that conservative advocates often fall into the reserve trap of valuing the body over the mind.

Even if we know that a trans person’s body is as God intended and it is the mind that is broken, a person’s gender is just as central to who they are.

Enduring gender incongruence is just as devastating and deserving of compassion as enduring a broken body.

If Christian leaders are going to invite trans Christians to honor God’s gift of their biological sex by refraining from hormonal/surgical transition,
and instead endure the pain of persisting gender incongruecne (even when that wisdom is true and will be better for those trans Christians in the long-term),
then those Christian leaders are still calling trans Christians to something profoundly difficult, made more difficult by decades of gender overprescription by Christian leaders.

Bearing that moral responsibility, what will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender? 
QUESTIONS
In what order might you choose to “stack” the integrity, disability, and diversity lenses?
What did you find compelling about our discussion of ontology and God’s intentions? What was lacking?
If your church invited trans* Christians to Equip’s wisdom on transitioning, what steps would you be willing to take to tend to the distress of those enduring persistent gender incongruence?

[Notes]
We’ve covered a lot in this session.
Take some time to review your notes, and then reflect individually or with others on the following questions:
In what order might you choose to “stack” the integrity, disability, and diversity lenses?
What did you find compelling about our discussion of ontology and God’s intentions? What was lacking?
If your church invited trans* Christians to Equip’s wisdom on transitioning, what steps would you be willing to take to tend to the distress of those enduring persistent gender incongruence?







SESSION OBJECTIVES
1. Stories & Terminology
2. The Bible + Theology
3. Culture & Pastoral Care
4. Kids & Case Studies


[Notes]
That concludes our second session
In the next session, we’ll survey alternate Christian and non-Christian perspectives on gender ethics and share how you can better care for those navigating gender incongruence in your churches and families

Thanks for your time and willingness to lean into this conversation for the sake of offering God’s love and wisdom to trans* people
I hope you’ll jump back in with our third session soon!

