God’s Love& Wisdom for Gay People

[Notes]
Today we’re going to be taking the next step in equipping you to offer God’s love and wisdom to gay people.
God’s Love & Wisdom
How to respond when someone comes out
Soft skills in sexual minority pastoral care
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
Navigating challenging theological questions in 1-on-1 discipleship

[Notes]
We’re going to do that by exploring…
How to respond when someone comes out to you
Soft skills in pastoral care with gay people
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
AND
how to navigate challenging theological questions that often come up in discipleship

a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
my story

[Notes]
So, why do each of my jobs have to do with sexuality and finding belonging in the body of Christ?
Why do these different kingdom callings matter to me?
Well, because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic Christian sexual ethic

God’s best for every Christian is either
Vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention) or
Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the kingdom).
Historic Christian sexual ethic

[Notes]
I’m going to use that phrase “historic Christian sexual ethic” often today, so let me clarify what I mean by that.

In my opinion, a historic Christian sexual ethic is a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either

vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)

or Christian marriage
(which is a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family
God’s Love & Wisdom
How to respond when someone comes out
Soft skills in sexual minority pastoral care
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
Navigating challenging theological questions in 1-on-1 discipleship

[Notes]
So now that you know a little bit about me, let’s talk about you
and the ways you hope to care for gay people inside and outside of your churches well!
Share
In the past, when someone came out to you or to your community, what was the response? Did that response strengthen relationship or leave them more hesitant about Jesus? Why?

[Notes]
so, how can you respond when someone comes out to you?
Well first, I’m curious what your experiences have been with people coming out?
In the past, when someone came out to you or to your community, what was the response?
Did that response strengthen relationship or leave them more hesitant about Jesus? Why?
when someone “comes out”

[Notes]
so, how can you respond when someone comes out to you?
let’s define what it means for someone to come out
When someone “comes out”
Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a revisionist sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex sex.

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.

[Notes]
Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.

But often people coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.
When someone “comes out”
Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. People share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.
When someone “comes out”
Avoid words/phrases like
homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual"
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as micro-aggressions.

When someone “comes out”
Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
God wants us to bring the challenges we face to our brothers and sisters in Christ and into the light.
Hiding often leads to shame and spiritual unhealth

Don't share their story with others without their permission.
“Outing” someone betrays their trust and may cause them to trust Jesus less.

Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
As we’ll explore more soon, people do not choose which attractions they develop
and there’s no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
Suggesting the opposite leads to false hope and loss of faith.

Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation.
As we’ll explore more soon, people develop their sexual orientation through a combination of genetic and childhood environmental factors,
but five-year-old’s noticing rainbow flags in their neighborhood or two people of the same sex holding hands
does not increase their likelihood of developing robust, enduring same-sex attractions.

Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.
While some communities talk about addiction (including alcoholism) in more sensitive ways than past decades,
a comparison to alcoholism, for example, still insinuates that the attractions are the same-sex attracted person’s fault
and that their attractions are a form of addiction (neither of which are true).
When someone “comes out”
Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Front Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try practicing term mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to terminology the person uses (or ask them),
ask them what they mean when they use those words,
and then use those same words with those same definitions as an act of hospitality. 

Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation
is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but is instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language and open the door for future conversation.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”
When someone “comes out”
Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed),
make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When someone “comes out”
Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.
Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When someone “comes out”
What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try these questions:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for *early* conversations.
If you already have a discipleship relationship with the individual,
you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship.
Even then, you need to have built up a meaningful amount of relational equity and trust before you directly address sexual ethics.

When someone “comes out”
Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first.

If they’re a Christian but disagree about sex ethics, remember the sins of past Christians against LGBT+ people.

[Notes]
Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
If they’re not Christians yet, don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned gay people to loneliness if committed to celibacy.
When someone “comes out”
Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


Share
What internal hesitation do you feel toward “focusing on salvation” and “redirecting to fundamental faith questions”? Why?

[Notes]
What internal hesitation do you feel toward “focusing on salvation” and “redirecting to fundamental faith questions”? Why?
God’s Love & Wisdom
How to respond when someone comes out
Soft skills in sexual minority pastoral care
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
Navigating challenging theological questions in 1-on-1 discipleship

[Notes]
okay, so someone comes out to you
and they want to keep meeting with you
they’re asking you to care for them
before you get to any theological questions
what are some best practices for your posture in pastoral care?
soft skills in pastoral care

[Notes]
in addition to what’s already been shared about
practicing term mirroring and listening well
Trust mental health pros
Clinical levels of depression, anxiety, suicidality, trauma, addiction, etc.?

Collaborate with clinical mental health professionals

[Notes]
if they person you’re caring for is struggling with clinical levels of depression, anxiety, suicidality, trauma, addiction, or anything else mental health related
please connect them with professional mental health resources
and continue to serve them pastorally
and collaborate with their mental health professional, as appropriate

remember:
You don’t have to be an expert in everything
Lean on your strengths
Ask for help from others


Pastoral care skills
Give lots of grace
Don’t be too defensive
Encourage authenticity
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
Trust the Holy Spirit
Focus on core questions

[Notes]
here’s some more general pastoral care skills I’d encourage you to lean on
Give lots of grace
Don’t be too defensive
Encourage authenticity
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
Trust the Holy Spirit
Focus on core questions

Give lots of grace
Gay Christians carry a lot of weight related to their sexuality

Avoid forced-choice moments

[Notes]
First, Give lots of grace.
Gay people, especially gay Christians, carry so much weight related to our sexuality.
We felt different from an early age, were often victims of bullying, feared family rejection,
wondered if God hated us, anticipated judgement and rejection at church,
often attempted to repress or hide our attractions or somehow become straight,
endured high levels of loneliness and isolation and depression and stress,
felt we were held to a higher standard of behavior than straight people,
and may have contemplated or attempted suicide.
You may be tempted to challenge the individual to choose between God and his or her gay identity, same-sex romantic relationship, stable view of self, etc.
But forcing this choice will likely lead the individual to reject God in favor of the goodness he or she has found in acceptance, community, and belonging among other LGBTQ+ people.

Instead, give them grace and time and space

You can invite the person to steward his or her sexuality according to a historic sexual ethic for now. 
Then, patiently explore what God believes about sexual stewardship,
why He has ordered the world in this way,
and what that might mean for the person you are walking with.

Give the person time to raise his or her concerns and work through those with the Holy Spirit.
We can trust the power of the gospel and the Holy Spirit to reveal what is true to each of us in HIS time.
Obedience to God’s commands and design can be a very hard road.
Gay people must give up the possibility of romance with and marriage to the person they’re most naturally attracted to,
must navigate a church culture that caters to straight, married people,
and must face Christians and churches who misunderstand or are willfully ignorant of the crosses that gay Christians bear.

Don’t be too defensive
The Church doesn’t get a pass

Give space for LGB people to share where your church could improve

Be willing to apologize

[Notes]
Second, Defend God’s wisdom, but don’t get caught up defending the misguided ways Christians have failed to embody God’s wisdom

Many Christians have made mistakes in the conversation surrounding faith and sexuality.
Many churches aren’t places where gay people can thrive with reasonable effort in their vocation.
Unfortunately, few have apologized.

You don’t need to apologize for your beliefs or say, “I’m sorry for Christianity’s view of marriage.”

But you CAN say, “I’m sorry for how some Christians have mistreated LGBTQ+ people – it really breaks my heart.
I’m sorry that our church isn’t a place where you can find committed, lived-in family right now.
This isn’t the way it’s supposed to be.”

You don’t need to apologize for holding a historic sexual ethic,
but it’s possible that the manner and tone of your belief has hurt someone who’s gay.
A sincere apology can go a long way.
Encourage authenticity
Encourage honesty, authenticity, and integration with oneself, God, and others

[Notes]
Third, Often our distress comes from disintegration
From dishonesty with self, God, or others
From incongruency between what we feel and think and believe

encourage those you minister to to integrate all of these parts of their life
and be honest with themselves, God, and closet family and friends
Reconnect them w/ Jesus
A personal relationship with Jesus is key to wholeness, but for many LGBT+ that relationship has been damaged by other Christians

[Notes]
Fourth, the heart of effective pastoral care is helping the person you are discipling deepen their personal relationship with Jesus.
Unfortunately, many LGB Christians have been hurt deeply by the actions of pastors and church mentors.
For some, even the Bible and prayer have become sources of shame.
This is a catch-22 for gay people.

They will find it difficult to thrive and enjoy wholeness without a personal relationship,
but the primary ways we typically invite Christians into that have been poisoned, at least temporarily.
So how can we navigate this, both to ensure that we’re caring for people well and to encourage deep discipleship?
It is of upmost importance to strike the right balance between encouraging a personal relationship with Jesus,
encouraging Bible reading and prayer, 
and not doing further damage or causing more shame.

For some gay people, this might mean patiently waiting for the Holy Spirit to heal old wounds caused by others who wielded Scripture and prayer as weapons.  
For others, it may mean finding non-threatening ways to include Bible reading and prayer in their lives.
This could mean using corporate prayers that are read aloud together during community group.  
An LGBT person may feel disconnected from private prayer, perhaps having been assured countless times that God would heal them through prayer.  
When He didn’t, prayer became a reminder of their failure to pray hard enough or God’s failure to act.  
Corporate prayer may be a way for LGBT+ people to engage in prayer safely.

This could mean avoiding “God is my friend”-type worship music.  
For someone who has been convinced that God is disappointed or disgusted with them because of something they can’t control (their sexual attraction), God isn’t a friend.  
He’s more like an angry giant.  
Instead, churches can choose music that leans on theology or corporate lament or praise instead of emotion-driven appeals.

This may mean that God doesn’t “speak to” everyone when they read Scripture and that not everyone will benefit from a “personal devotion” or “quiet time.”  
And being ok with Scripture used as learning about God’s character and the way He wants us to live.  
Not everyone will find a personal meaning in Scripture that fits their exact circumstance and walk away from Bible study feeling that they were “fed” or “filled.”  
Offer these Christians other ways to engage in Scripture and deepen their understanding of the character of God that isn’t dependent on emotions.
Of course, we hope that Bible-reading and prayer eventually lose their shame-producing capabilities.  
We want gay people to think of God as a loving brother and hear His voice.  
But for many LGB people, that’s not the reality right now.  
And it may never be.  
So we can get creative with our discipling efforts.


Trust the Holy Spirit
Be patient with the Holy Spirit and be a consistent presence in their life.

God’s wisdom will seem inconvenient and unfair to many, so give them time and space to process.

[Notes]
fifth, Be patient with the Holy Spirit and be a consistent presence in their life.

God’s wisdom will seem inconvenient and unfair to many,
so give them time and space to process.

Focus on core questions
Redirect from sexual ethics to core questions of faith:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
And sixth, remember, debate about sexual ethics is often too emotionally loaded to be helpful
Instead, redirect questions about sexual ethics to discussion about more fundamental questions of faith

dig deeper into whether they believe there is a God
whether they trust that God knows what’s best for them
and what they believe is the most reliable way to discover God’s wisdom for them

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Care for closet wounds
Many gay people make sense of their sexuality alone in the closet and develop…
anxiety
depression
suicidality
body shame
unhealthy coping mechanisms (particularly sexual addiction)
internalized homophobia

[Notes]
once you’ve established a good baseline for pastoral care
you can begin addressing one of the big needs for many who you’ll minister to: the wounds of the closet
what are closet wounds?

many gay people spent years, or even a decade, privately making sense of their sexuality
without the love and wisdom of their parents
alone with the lies of the Enemy
many many developed wounds of the closet from that tortured isolation:
anxiety
depression
suicidality
unhealthy coping mechanisms (particularly sexual addiction)
body shame
internalized homophobia

Compared to their straight peers, gay people are…
4X more likely to attempt suicide
2.5X more likely to struggle with anxiety or depression
2X more likely to deal with body shame (gay males)

We don’t time/space to cover in-depth how to provide care around each of these specific wounds
My hunch is you can find some high-quality resources about pastoral care generally for people navigating anxiety, depression, suicidality, body shame, and sexual addiction
So I’ll make a quick note about sexual addiction and then share a bit more in depth about internalized homophobia

Briefly, I want to be clear: LGBT+ does not automatically mean sex addict
But, for many gay people who have felt the need to hide their sexuality and experience anxiety and depression from that hiding
Porn offers escape/numbing from painful emotions
And a false sense of connecting with others they are secretly drawn to
So gay people are particularly vulnerable to developing addictive habits with pornography
that later lead to addictive use of hookup apps
Be prepared to offer care around this and connect people with effective sex addiction resources/support
But also make clear that you don’t assume they’re a sex addict just because they’re gay or think that same-sex attractions are inherently some form of sex addiction
Internalized homophobia
The Enemy tricks closeted gay people into believing that the best way to please God is to hate oneself.

Encourage them to share their story with safe people and notice whether they respond with love.

[Notes]
I do want to equip you in more depth around internalized homophobia

remember that horrible stereotype about gay people that I mentioned I heard growing up:
that gay people all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs,
and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.

well, a very common experience of the closet is that closeted gay people internalize that homophobia
we actually learn to be homophobic ourselves
we learn to hate gay people
and hate ourselves
because we think that’s the best way to make God happy

it’s a sad, twisted, destructive form of shame
commonly, the Enemy tricks gay people into believing that if we just hate ourselves enough, perhaps our attractions would go away
or we would be able to master our attractions
or at least if we can’t get rid of our attractions and keep messing up, we’ll show God how much we hate ourselves
and how much we despise ourselves
that maybe God will be more likely to forgive us
and be willing to tolerate us

this internalized homophobia can linger
years later, a gay person might find themselves afraid to be friends with other gay people
not only because they’re afraid to cross boundaries
but because at some core level, they think gay people are bad

there’s an inner yuck that they haven’t gotten rid of
and that internalized homophobia might lead them to hate anything related to pride
or anything flamboyant

for some people, they break the spell of internalized homophobia by first having compassion on other gay people
and then learning to extend that same compassion toward themselves

for me, I remember this moment in college when a gay atheist on our campus was being bullied
and in the midst of that, he shared with me his story of growing up in the Church but being bullied and finding it impossible to believe that a loving God existed
and in that moment, I found myself filled with so much compassion for him
so much desire for God to do whatever possible to reach into this guy’s heart and undo all of the pain and injury from the bullying he’d experienced
and that compassion for him for some reason flipped a switch in me
I was suddenly able to have compassion on myself as well

for many, they have to experience other Christians loving them before they can believe God would love them
every time they share their story and a Christian responds by drawing closer instead of pushing away, it makes it a little bit easier to believe

I’ve found Eve Tushnet’s book Tenderness to be a powerful resource around pushing back on internalized homophobia
and for anyone who’s a survivor of pray-the-gay-away practices, watching the moving Boy Erased can be a powerful experience to grow compassion for self and others
Mourn closet wounds
Hold space to grieve wounds of the closet:
Honor the pain and unfairness
Grieve the ways they linger and haunt
Name the present burdens from the failures of past Christians

[Notes]
In general, hold space for those you’re ministering to to grieve the wounds of the closet
help them honor how painful and unfair that anxiety, depression, suicidality, body shame, addiction, and internalized homophobia have benn

mourn the years of childhood and teen years that were lost
the lost sense of who you were, of self-worth, of authenticity and showing up in the world as you

grieve the ways those wounds still linger and haunt them
name the unfairness of the failures of the Church and the ways those burdens continue to weigh down gay Christians today
Accept brokenness
Practice surrender around enduring brokenness/suffering.

Balance self-conceptualization of broken sexuality using three lenses: integrity, disability, and diversity.

[Notes]
i’ve got five more suggestions for pastoral care of sexual minorities
first, help them practice some acceptance around enduring brokenness in their life

Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life.
Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness.
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls!

Help gay Christians you’re ministering to explore what Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering
and how they found a way to accept persisting brokenness.
And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.

Some pain will be unavoidable.

Those you minister to might find it easier to accept enduring brokenness if they’re offered a more nuanced way to conceptualized their same-sex attractions
Mark Yarhouse suggested that there’s three lenses through which Christians can view and seek to understand same-sex attractions:
the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.

The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of same-sex attractions and how Christians respond.
Generally, when Christians use the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask,
“What actions are sins? What actions are seemingly morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?”
If Christians seek to understand same-sex attractions exclusively through the integrity lens,
they would primarily explore whether same-sex romantic or sexual activity are sinful.

The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness
that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian
and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps
to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people.
When Christians view same-sex attractions through the disability lens, they recognize that same-sex attraction is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world,
but those navigating same-sex attractions do not choose to experience those attractions nor is there a reliable method for eliminating those attractions.
Christians seeking to understand same-sex attractions through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches
to care for gay people with God’s love and wisdom as those gay people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.

The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ.
When Christians who hold a revisionist sexual ethic view SSAs through the diversity lens,
they see the gay experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God.
However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand SSAs through the diversity lens,
they ask how a Christian faithfully navigating SSAs may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ
particularly from stewarding their brokenness
(while recognizing that God did not intend for anyone to experience SSAs).

As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand SSAs through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate.
Like a kaleidoscope, we appreciate the complexity of SSAs when we stack all three lenses on top of each other
and seek to understand SSAs through them simultaneously.
There are simultaneously moral questions,
an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating SSAs with the support they need to thrive,
and an opportunity to recognize and appreciate the spiritual gifts gay Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus.

If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses,
we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses,
with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens.
This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom
while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating SSAs to do so faithfully.
Meet intimacy needs
We’re all made for human connection in the context of community.

Encourage gay Christians to proactively meet their healthy intimacy needs in non-romantic, non-sexual ways.

[Notes]
second, encourage them to meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways

we are all made for connection in the context of community
that’s no less true for lgbt+ people, even if they feel called to walk out celibacy

as we’ll explore in greater detail later in our section about sexual stewardship for all people,
if any of us ignore our healthy needs for intimacy, broken parts of us will eventually compel us to reach out for self-destructive shortcuts

the solution isn’t to learn how to starve ourselves and clench our fists even more effectively
instead the solution is to actively meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways

as we’ll explore more later, none of us need romance or sex to meet our intimacy needs
but everyone needs healthy physical and emotional intimacy
including lgbt+ people who feel called to walk out celibacy

name and honor that in their lives
and support them in their efforts to develop healthy intimacy in their friendships
Solidify convictions
Hold space for gay Christians to externally process what they find inconsistent or unfair about God’s wisdom so they can eventually solidify their convictions.

[Notes]
third, help them solidify their convictions

don’t rush this
if you try to force someone to “choose a side” before they’ve addressed lingering closet wounds
before they’ve done some acceptance work around brokenness
before they’ve been meeting their intimacy needs in healthy ways
then they’re bound to choose a revisionist sexual ethic
not based on logic
but out of their pain and desperation and felt sense of unfairness

but after you’ve addressed those,
eventually people desire the stability that comes from really working through their theological questions and landing solidly somewhere

but they’re going to need intellectually honest space to point out what seems inconsistent or unfair or unclear about God’s wisdom as it’s been presented to them
and you’re gonna need to work through that stuff with them

be honest when you both feel like you don’t have good enough answers
and reach out to peope who are even more experts when you get stuck
Clarify vocation
Many in uncommitted singleness find it difficult to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work.

Support their discernment and help them settle down into vocational singleness or a mixed orientation marriage.

[Notes]
fourth, help them clarify their vocation

once you’ve supported them in all of the ways weve already mentioned
and they’ve solidly landed on a historic sexual ethic
they’ll experience more thriving and stability in life if they actually discern between vocational singleness and MOM
and settle down into one or the other
and move out of involuntary singleness

as we’ll explore more later, every Christian young adult should open-handedly discern between
vocational singleness and Christian marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
including LGBT+ Christians

this doesn’t mean that I think every gay Christian has to date someone of the opposite sex
but at means at least being emotionally and theologically open to the possibility
and genuinely discerning both

If we’re going to ask straight Christians to discern both, we’ve got to ask gay Christians to discern both

As for the impacts of never committing to vocational singleness
and instead defaulting to long-term singleness in a way that might feel forced and involuntary
I think there’s lot of dangers associated with that
I’d commend to you a lengthy essay I wrote on this exact topic titled “From Involuntary Celibacy to Thriving”
at pieterLvalk dot com

in short, involuntary celibacy leads to self-pity, resentment, and self-loathing that Satan uses to tempt us to self-destruction
instead, we’ve got to own our celibacy because there are significant advantages to being all-in. 
And discernment can help us own our celibacy.
You see, discernment is about much more than just identifying the most likely path forward.
It's also about accepting, embracing, choosing, taking a leap of faith, seeking confirmation, and stepping forward.
Discernment can help us move from seeing our celibacy as involuntary to seeing our celibacy as chosen.

I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.
Connect with community
Those called to vocational singleness need lifelong, lived-in human family.

And it’s the responsibility of the Church to cultivate that community. So get busy!

[Notes]
and fifth, help them connect with community

long-term, they’re going to need much more than just a revolving door of roommates and small groups
don’t you?
we are all made for lifelong, lived-in human family
including those called to vocational singleness
including lgbt+ people called to vocational singleness
we’ll explore more how we know that

and The Church has a rich history of offering vocational singles robust family in the body of Christ.
during the first five centuries of the Church, the most common form of celibacy was what was called city monks
who made lifetime commitments to celibacy, lived in cities in homes with other celibacy and had normal jobs,
but used their availability to serve the poor and needy in their city for the sake of the gospel

and the Church accepted the responsibility to cultivate these communities for celibate people
In Acts 6, we see that the first administrative act of the Church was to provide a home and family for celibate women

Acts 6 verses 1-7 describes a scene where immigrant widows were being accidentally neglected.
The love of Jesus was drawing unmarried people to the church—thank the Lord!
But the need had become too great to be met organically and too great for those called to primarily preach/teach to also take care of these celibate women.
Yet they recognized that it was the responsibility of the Church,
so they empowered other leaders to take care of these practical responsibilities and they resourced that work.

Then fast forward to 1 Timothy 5, Paul is talking about the proper care of widows.
And what do we see?
A house of widows, the beginnings of one of these city celibate homes, a place where celibate women are finding family!

While Paul is holding some of those women accountable for unfaithfulness and offering some lesser-of-two-evils-accommodations,
topline he’s still affirming that it would be best if they kept their commitments to permanent celibacy and family together in the house of widows.

Clearly the Church had by 1 Timothy 5 made good on its commitment in Acts 6 to provide for widows, for celibate women, not only to have food, but to have a home and a family.
That was the first administrative act of the Church.
It’s what leads to establishing the first generation of church leaders after the apostles.
Providing for celibate people is what the Church was created to do.
So get busy!

honor the broken reality and unmet need
accept responsibility
gather singles
inspire intentional Christian community
help them take early steps
support logistically and emotionally


Share
Which of these pastoral care skills comes most easily to you? Which might you find most challenging? Why? And how can you grow in those?

[Notes]
Which of these pastoral care skills comes most easily to you?
Which might you find most challenging?
Why?
And how can you grow in those?

God’s Love & Wisdom
How to respond when someone comes out
Soft skills in sexual minority pastoral care
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
Navigating challenging theological questions in 1-on-1 discipleship

[Notes]
so once we’ve establish rapport with a gay person we’re ministering too
and offered them compassionate pastoral care
how can we invite them to become more like Jesus as it relates to their sexuality?
well, to be honest, in the same ways we invite everyone to steward their sexualities
sexual stewardship for everyone

[Notes]
and I think this is key: gay people don’t need a different version of the bible
or a different version of God’s wisdom
they need the same wisdom as straight Christians

but if your church isn’t yet inviting straight Christians to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways,
then you cant invite gay people to do that

so how do you invite everyone, and in particular straight people, to do that?

What did God make us for?

Some think God doesn’t want us to have fun.

Some think they need as much sex/romance as possible with the most attractive people to be most happy.

[Notes]
start with exploring what God made us for as sexual beings

what does God want us to do with our sexuality?
and what do we want?
some people think God wants us to have no fun
to show our love for him by learning to be content with loneliness and dissatisfaction
to obsess about avoiding sin
and some of us think that what we want is to have as much sex and romance with the most attractive people we can convince to be with us

both of those are off
that's not what God wants
and that's not what we really want
What did God make us for?

We want genuine connection, lasting community, to know and be known.

God wants the same for us! He made each of us for connection in the context of community.

[Notes]
we want genuine connection
we want to not be lonely
we want community
we want love that lasts
we want richer, more meaningful, steady relationship
we want to feel safe
to trust that the people who love us love us well and keep doing so until we die
we want people to go on this life journey with who truly know us
and therefore know how to accompany us well on that journey
and we want to offer the same to others
and enjoy the delight that can only be achieved after decades of that knownness

and God wants those same things for us
our capacity for connection and need for community isn't a test
it's a gift
he made us in his image to enjoy intimacy with Him and each other
and he wants us to enjoy that to the fullest
Made for connection in the context of community

Two best paths: vocational singleness and Christian marriage

Brokenness tempts us to settle for less. But thankfully, God has offered us warning and wisdom.

[Notes]
He first made the world perfectly and imagined all of us connecting with each other in community.
And He gave us two best ways, two different but equally good paths for enjoying connection:
vocational singleness and Christian marriage.

But unfortunately humans have consistently chosen to ignore God's wisdom and trust their own ideas over God's,
leading to brokenness in every part of the world and ourselves.
he knows that in a broken world we will be tempted to settle for less than the fullest life

Thankfully, God looked over our broken world and broken selves,
and He shared with us in the teachings of Jesus and others
warnings about what will cause us harm and to avoid those
plus wisdom about the best ways we can still enjoy connection in community
He gave us direction for how to enjoy our sexuality to the fullest
What is sexual stewardship?

God has given each of us the task of managing our need for community and our capacity for connection.

But our sexualities are just one of many opportunities for stewardship!

[Notes]
Or to put it another way, God has invited us to steward our sexualities

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul admonishes Corinthian Christians for their sexual immorality and calls them to sexual stewardship:

“Do you not know that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your bodies.” —vv. 19–20

Our bodies were made by and given to us by God.
All have sold their bodies to the slavery of sin with our disobedience.
Yet Christ in his mercy paid the price for that sin, bought us back and chose to dwell in us.
Our bodies are not our own.
They are dwelling places for the Holy Spirit that we’ve been given to steward on this side of heaven
until we receive our perfected resurrected bodies for the New Jerusalem.

So sexual stewardship refers to our God-given task of managing our capacity for friendship, family, romance, and sex and our need for healthy intimacy.
As believers, we all called to steward, to carefully and faithfully manage, multiple aspects of our lives in ways that honor God:
finances, the environment, eating and exercise, sleep, mental health, meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways,
character development, and how we leverage our 9-to-5 jobs for the sake of the kingdom.
Faithfully stewarding each of our sexualities is just one of those tasks, but an important one!

Framing conversation around sexual stewardship is helpful because it zooms out from focusing only on sex and marriage
Too often, a simple “save sex for marriage” mantra suggests that marriage and sex are something that we are owed and can take.
That we have a right to seek our pleasure, as long as we follow the rules.
Instead, a focus on sexual stewardship more broadly includes vocational singleness and suggests that marriage and sex aren’t forgone conclusions.
The phrase “sexual stewardship” properly identifies our sexualities as a gift from God
that we are meant to fearfully and faithfully steward before God based on his wisdom, not based on our pleasure.

How do we know that? Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.
Made for connection in the context of community

[Notes]
So let's start with the basics:
God created you for connection in the context of community

How do we know that?
Because God is a being who enjoys connection in the context of community, and He created us in His image for those same things.

God is a being in community.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit make up a community called the Trinity.
Then when Jesus died on the cross for our sins and resurrected, He made a way for all of us to join the Trinity in God’s family.
You see, God enjoys perfect connection in the Trinity, and while Christians don’t always love God perfectly, He loves us perfectly in the big family of God.
Because we’re made in God’s image, designed to imitate God, we’re also made for connection in communities.




sexuality =

our need to be in community

+ our capacity to connect with other humans
Connection in Community

[Notes]
We call our need to be in community, our capacity to connect with other humans, “sexuality.”

You see, often when people talk about sexuality, they use that word narrowly to only refer to romance and sex.
But there's so much more to our sexuality than just romance and sex.
Even if God calls you to Christian marriage and to enjoy romance and sex in that context,
you'll spend at least the first couple decades of your life unmarried and you might end up spending the last decade or two of your life unmarried, as a widow.
Others of you will never marry.




Even if you get married, most of your connection will be non-romantic and nonsexual
Connection in Community

[Notes]
And even if you get married, your spouse will just be one of many people you'll interact with each day.
You’ll interact with coworkers, friends, any children you have, and other family members.
Do you see what I'm getting at?
Regardless of whether you get married, most of your interactions with other people in your life will be non-romantic and non-sexual,
yet those interactions will still be meaningful connection.
When God made us to be relational creatures,
He intended for most of our connections with each other, most of the times we engage our sexuality, to be non-romantic and non-sexual.




Our need to know others and be known, to give and receive love
We don't need romance/sex to meet our needs for connection
We have physical bodies + intellectual minds + emotional/spiritual soul, so we need connection on each of those levels
Our sexuality is…


[Notes]
So how can we think more broadly about sexuality and our created need and capacity for connection in the context of community?

More generally, our sexuality is our need to know others and be known by others.
to give and receive love
But I'm not just talking about romantic love.
This also includes brotherly and sisterly love. Friend love.

That’s key to understand: we don't need romance or sex to meet our needs for connection.
And the Bible never promises romance or sex to people who follow God.
Let me explain.

One way to think about our needs for connection is to imagine a set of buckets that need to be filled with water.
Each of the buckets represent a kind of connection we need and the water is the connection.
Because we each have a physical body and an intellectual mind and an emotional and spiritual soul,
God designed us to need and have connection on a physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual level.





[Notes]
Imagine four buckets, one labeled “emotional,” the second labeled “spiritual,” the third labeled “physical,” and the fourth labeled “intellectual.”


emotional connection = having convos that help you connect w/ gladness, fear, anger, or sadness in you (or others)

[Notes]
When I say emotional connection, I mean having conversations that help you connect with gladness or fear or anger or sadness inside of you, and where you notice some of those same things in others.


spiritual connection = connecting that makes you feel more connected to God (talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, worshiping together)

[Notes]
When I say spiritual connection, I mean connecting in a way that makes you feel more connected to God, by talking about spiritual things, reading Scripture together, or worshiping together.


physical connection = hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, etc.

[Notes]
When I say physical connection, I mean a hug, holding hands, sitting next to each other on the couch, putting your arm around someone’s shoulder, and yes, kissing and cuddling and sex.


intellectual connection = exchanging and exploring ideas with another person

[Notes]
When I say intellectual connection, I mean exchanging and exploring ideas with another person.


[Notes]
Now some would argue that there is a fifth bucket labeled “sexual.”
That we all need sexual connection to be whole, and if we don’t get it, we will feel empty.
But I know plenty of people who have never had sex and who are full adults.
They share with me that they have vibrant social lives, rich connection, and a satisfying experience of community.

That’s been true in my own life.
The healthy emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual connection I have experienced in friendships
has been much more satisfying than the broken physical connection I have experienced in the past.
In contrast, I’ve known lots of single people who haven't followed God's wisdom and have had sex outside of marriage.
But despite the beautiful photos they post on instagram
When I talk to them one-on-one, they share with me that they feel empty.
That it's fun in the moment, but they're always living in fear of the person leaving 
or they’re afraid to let the other person really know them because they might break up tomorrow.

so no, we don't need romance or sex to be happy or whole people

Jesus didn’t have sex. 
Paul was committed to celibacy (+many Christian leaders in the past 2000 years)
Matthew 22:30 says there won’t be marriage/sex in heaven.
The Bible doesn’t teach that we need marriage/sex or promise them


[Notes]
Plus, the Bible doesn’t teach that we need sex or romance to be whole people.
Quite the opposite. Jesus didn’t have sex. Jesus is the example of what it means to be fully human,
so clearly romance and sex aren’t necessary to be fully human.

Paul was committed to celibacy.
Many of the early leaders in the Church were celibate.
And in Matthew 22:30, Jesus suggests that in Heaven, there won’t be any more marriage or sex
because the non-romantic, non-sexual ways we'll connect with God and each other will be 1000 times better than any romance or sex in this life



[Notes]
Instead, there are four connection buckets. Emotional, intellectual, physical, and spiritual.
God provides a good chunk of our spiritual connection.
Those who are married will partially fill each of those buckets with the connection they experience in their marriage.
But, even if you’re married, God and your spouse alone won’t fill your connection buckets.
You will still need emotional connection, intellectual connection, physical connection, and spiritual connection from friendship.

Share
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?
Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

[Notes]
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?

Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

What best paths did God provide?

[Notes]
okay, so we’ve described what God made us for as sexual beings
next, let’s explore the best paths God has given us to enjoy our sexualities to the fullest!

God has made all of us to find connection in the context of community
What does that look like practically?
And how do we do that well?

God designed two best ways/vocations for Christians to enjoy connection in the context of community:
Vocational Singleness
Christian marriage
*How* can we connect in community?

[Notes]
In short, God has designed two paths for Christians to do that,
two vocations
and He wants to give some of us the gift to walk down one of those paths and others the gift to walk down the other path:
Vocational singleness and Christian marriage
both of these are particular ways adult Christians can enjoy connection in the context of community

This is *THE* key lever of God-honoring and life-giving sexual stewardship
If you want the most satisfying connection in community for a lifetime
Then accept the gift that God wants to give you
And live fully into God’s design for the vocation He gave you

The key to sexual stewardship isn’t focusing on what we’re supposed to say “no” to
More often than not, when I meet lonely, disconnected, relationally wounded people
It’s because there are ways they could more fully say “yes” to God’s calling for their lives
And His design for that vocation


Why “vocation”?

A Christian vocation is a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision.

[Notes]
Why do I say vocation?
Well, A Christian vocation is generally a calling with a specific design for a specific purpose with a specific provision. 
Why “vocation”?

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom.

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention

Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom

How are Christians called to steward their sexuality?

[Notes]
As this diagram depicts, we’re all first called to a period of temporary singleness
during which we discern whether we’re called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage

As we will tease out more later, vocational singleness is distinct from temporary singleness
It is best for everyone to settle down into marriage or vocational singleness, instead of a prolonged temporary singleness
Marriage and vocational singleness are equally good callings, but marriage will be more common
There is no default path, one’s calling should be an open-handed question for every Christian

I want to sit here a second
These distinctions were mind-blowing for me when I first saw them in Scripture

None of us are on a default path
Not supposed to just take what we want
Shouldn’t continue in the limbo of uncommitted singleness
Two options
Both equally good and normal but one more common
Need to ask God which He wants me to do
I won’t get the gift from God to do either well until I step out of temporary singleness and COMMIT
Share
What are some gaps in the ways we teach about and support singleness/marriage for straight people that makes LGBT+ ministry harder?
What steps could we take to address those gaps (for the benefit of both straight and gay people?)

[Notes]
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?

Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
So where do we start?
Well, we’re are all first called to a temporary period of abstinent singleness
in which we enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ in non-sexual, non-romantic companionship.

A period of temporary singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong vocational singleness nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
We should all learn to do this well

This is a calling to neither vocational singleness nor marriage
—defining our default calling in the negative is not sufficient but it is informative—
we are not yet called to vocational singleness or to marriage. 

We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires,
want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 

We should all submit our sexuality to God, study what the Scriptures have to say about sexual stewardship,
and discern with God and spiritual mentors in our lives whether we are called to vocational singleness or marriage.

Why distinguish between temporary and vocational singleness?
singleness we’re born into + waiting for marriage vs. committed + lifetime for the single-minded kingdom work
uncommitted singles feel shallowly rooted in kingdom work and spiritual family
Jesus + Paul commend one, not the other
Temporary Singleness

[Notes]
But why distinguish between temporary singleness and vocational singleness?

Well, there’s a big difference between the singleness we’re all born into and experience as children
vs. committed, lifetime, vocational singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work.
There’s a big difference between just waiting for marriage
vs. accepting a call to permanently give up the possibility of romance, marriage, sex, and children in order to use that availability to do kingdom work that parents can’t.

But I know many in uncommitted singleness who find it difficult
to commit to a particular spiritual family or kingdom work
because they feel like they need to be ready to reorganize their life around a future marriage.
They struggle with job dissatisfaction, kingdom work unfulfillment, loneliness,
and a sense of waiting for life to start.

Plus, the two passages where Jesus and Paul encourage Christians to consider kingdom singleness aren’t commending temporary singleness
—they’re commending committed, lifetime singleness.

In order to receive the gift from God to do vocational singleness well, we have to step out of temporary singleness and into committed singleness.
So if someone is in temporary singleness, without the gift of singleness, and struggling, perhaps part of the difficult is that they haven’t receive the gift yet

the Church has consistently taught that it is NOT God’s intention for Christians to continue in temporary for a lifetime
For the vast majority, it is better to settle down into vocational singleness or marriage
That being said, there are always exceptions to the rule. God will choose not to give some Christians a call to marriage or vocational singleness.
For some, faithfully following God’s guidance will look like continuing to leave open the possibility of both vocational singleness and marriage,
continuing into their 30s, 40s, 50s, or perhaps for their entire life.
While less common than either vocational singleness or marriage, faithfully continuing in temporary singleness should be honored and supported in our churches.
 



Discernment

[Notes]
Okay, so there’s a difference between temporary and vocational singleness
I’ve got a sense of how to do temporary singleness well
But why should I discern? And how do I discern?

we did a whole webinar on this earlier in 2023
but I’ll briefly review today



Why should everyone discern?

Matthew 19:11-12 and 1 Corinthians 7 make clear that our relational vocation—marriage or vocational singleness—is called and given, not chosen
Why discern?

[Notes]
Everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference

Why?
because
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us

Where does Scripture teach this?
In Matthew 19, verse 11, in his response to the disciples’ shock about his high standard for marriage, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of marriage has been given will accept his teachings about marriage. And then in verse 12, Jesus says that only those to whom the calling of vocational singleness has been given will accept his teachings about vocational singleness.
Jesus says that God calls us to either marriage or vocational singleness, and God gives us a gift to thrive in that vocation
Then in 1 Corinthians 7 verse 7, Paul says that he wishes all were like him—all were called to vocational singleness—but God has given each his own gift. God has called some to vocational singleness. God has called others to marriage.

In some ways, our preference does not matter
We can share our preference with God, but ultimately we should learn what God’s preference is and ask Him to conform our desires to His desires

At this point, you might point out that in Matt 19:12, Jesus speaks of “choosing” to live like a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom?
Doesn’t that contradict what we’re saying here?

Actually, we agree that one’s relational vocation should be entered into voluntarily.
No one should be forced into marriage or forced into vocational singleness.
But this doesn’t mean that all that matters is our own preference or desire.
This doesn’t mean that we only have to be single or married if we really want to.

Christ’s teachings make it clear that God has a call for us and that we should obey that call.
God intends for our preference to be conformed to His preference.
But no one should be forced into celibacy before their will has aligned with God’s, just as no one should be forced into a marriage without being called to it and recognizing that call.
Jesus’s use of the word “chosen” should be a clear admonishment of anyone being forced into a relational vocation if they haven’t discerned that call.

We should also discern God’s calling, ask God to show us why that is best for us, be patient for our heart to grow to desire God’s best for us,
and then choose to accept God’s gift!


A desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or difficulty being single doesn’t indicate God’s calling.

Each of us has the same inherent capacity for both marriage and vocational singleness.
Why discern?

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.
Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.

Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.
Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.
We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.

In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come naturally to us.
Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.

So we should discern and settle down into either marriage or vocational singleness because none of us have what we need inherently to thrive in Christian marriage or vocational singleness

speaking of which
Still others might say, “Well, doesn’t 1 Corinthians 7:9 say that if you find abstinence difficult, you’re called to marriage?”

That’s a common interpretation
It’s actually more accurate to read this as a specific rebuke of Corinthian Christians who had adopted quasi-gnostic ideas that the real us was our mind and spirit
That our bodies were these gross containers we are stuck in for a lifetime but would be thrown away
So it didn’t matter if we mistreated our bodies
As a result, some of these Corinthian Christians were claiming to be celibate in spirit but then engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality because the body didn’t matter
Regardless, the general principle holds true: it is unwise to walk the path of a vocation of singleness without the gift to do it well.
But the same could be said of marriage: it is unwise to engage in some of the activities of marriage without God’s provision that comes from taking marriage vows and stepping into that vocation fully.
“Discernment” in the Bible?

Is the word discernment used in the Bible in this specific way? No.

But it leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole that the Church has consistently commended.

[Notes]
Now, admittedly, is the word discernment used in any of these passages? no

but all of this leaves an undeniably discernment-shaped hole
and its the conclusion of the early Church, the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church,
and the only two Protestant theologians to offer systematic theologies of celibacy: Max Thurian and Karl Barth

if there's no default path, if we must step forward out of temporary singleness and commit to something in order to receive the gift,
if both vocations are permanent, if God has a preference and is calling us, if we're not supposed to just take what we want or step forward recklessly

how do we learn God's preference from him? how do we hear the call? how do we know which path to step toward? how do we make sure we consider this question carefully?

DISCERNMENT

So God eventually calls most of us to either a vocation of singleness or a vocational of marriage.
And everyone should discern this question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage
We should all open-handedly offer these possibilities to God and seek His preference




Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
Consider what kind of work you might be called to
Consider your past and current circumstances
Seek support from your church
How to Discern

[Notes]
what, then, does it look like to ask God this question?
to give God a chance?
to discern?

Here’s 5 sugg estions

Grow your ”spiritual muscles” for general discernment
Do you know how to bring a question before God, consider Scripture, consider practical aspects of your question, seek advice from spiritual mentors, arrive at a potential conclusion, hold that conclusion before God, seek confirmation through small steps, and move forward with confidence?
Before we ask a question as important as marriage or vocational singleness, let’s practice our skills of discernment on less consequential decisions.
A good book on this is God’s Voice Within

Then, remove any emotional or theological barriers to clear discernment
You need to make sure you have a healthy theological understanding of both vocational singleness and marriage so that you aren’t biased against either
And work through an emotional barriers: fear of marriage because of a family history of divorce or an idolatry of romance

Consider what kind of work you might be called to, and see if that points you toward vocational singleness or marriage
If you feel like the primary work you’ve been called to is to raise children for the Church, then you’re probably called to marriage
Or if you feel called to a mission that might be mutually exclusive with raising children
Like a special mission, a difficult ministry, a life of contemplation or study, or monastic life, then you’re probably called to vocational singleness

Consider your past and current circumstances
Have any experiences from your past pointed you toward one vocation or another?
Or perhaps you find yourself single later in life and ask, “I am still single not by accident, but because God has called me to vocational singleness?”
I’m not saying that every adult who is single later in life has been called to vocational singleness
But perhaps if someone is single later in life, that is a sign of God’s intentions

Seek support from your church in the discernment process. Invite mentors to lead you in this process. Get feedback from friends and family about your discernment. These people can  can often provide better advice with an outside perspective.



Share
How might teens and young adults in your community respond to an invitation to discern? What theological re-education might be needed?

[Notes]
How might teens and young adults in your community respond to an invitation to discern?
What theological re-education might be needed?

Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about celibacy, or as I prefer to call it, vocational singleness

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom 
let me break down each of those

“a lifetime calling…”
God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness.
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us.
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling...
it’s a calling
We’ve already established that God calls us to either a vocation of marriage or a vocation of singleness
the Bible teaches that our vocation is given or called, not chosen
God has a preference and wants to communicate that preference to us
 
but it’s not just a calling, it’s a lifetime calling
God intended for vocational singleness to be committed and permanent
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus speaks of a call beyond temporary singleness and compares vocational singleness to being a eunuch, a state which is permanent
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul recognizes and praises committed singleness and teaches that it is better to keep a commitment to vocational singleness
 
Plus, the early Church unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be teaching about a permanent commitment to celibate singleness
The disciples of the apostles, and their disciples and their disciples, unanimously understood Jesus and Paul to be commending permanent celibacy, instead of waiting for marriage.
We’re talking about people like St. Clement of Rome (the disciple and successor of Peter the Apostle), St. Ignatius of Antioch (the disciple of John the Apostle), St. Justin the Martyr, St. Athenagoras of Athens, Polycrates of Ephesus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian of Carthage, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and St. Methodius of Olympus. 

“a lifetime calling to singleness…”
A call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
Still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness...
 
Vocational singleness is a call to give up romance, dating, marriage, and sex
but that doesn’t mean that a person is called to loneliness
its still a call to intimacy in the context of committed family
In Matthew 19:1-12, Jesus talks about vocational singleness as a giving up of romance, marriage, sex, and children 
and then in Luke 18:28-30, Jesus promises a 100-fold of brothers, sisters, and children now in this present time to those who give up the potential for a spouse and children for the sake of the kingdom
In 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul confirms that vocational singleness involves giving up sex, romance, marriage, and children but recognizes that those called to vocational singleness still need committed companionship

“a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom”
Do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Embody the gospel in unique ways
Give every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so now we’ve got the “what”
what is vocational singleness
now let’s talk about the “why”
why does God call people to this lifetime vocation of singleness?
 
Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
 
Jesus uses the phrase “for the sake of the kingdom” in Matthew 19:1-12 and Luke 18:28-30 to describe vocational singleness
Those called to vocational singleness do that in three ways:
First, God intended for those in vocational singleness to use their availability, primarily from not raising children, to do kingdom work that those raising children don’t have the time and energy to do
Iin 1 Cor 7:1-40, Paul explains that vocational singleness involves giving up a spouse and children to be more concerned with the work of the Church
 
Second, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it embodies the gospel in unique ways
Similarly to marriage, vocational singleness is an image of the love of God found in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church that preaches the gospel by pointing us back to the true things that image reflects
vocational singleness is spiritually procreative, sacrificial, committed, intimate, and hospitable, pointing those who see that image back to the original source: God’s love
 
And third, vocational singleness is for the sake of the kingdom because it gives every Christian hope for the New Heavens and New Earth
in Luke 20:34-36, Jesus teaches that all will be celibate in the New Heaven and New Earth
so vocational singleness preaches the gospel in way that marriage does not by serving as a physical sign and hope for how we will all live in the NHNE

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants. So when Christian celibates fulfilled the promises in Isaiah 56:3-5 and Luke 18:29 by experiencing more family, belonging, and honor than married people; they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us.

But let me update that for a modern audience. Today, westerners seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness. So modern Christian vocational singleness can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.

Christians today should look at those in vocational singleness, see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.

Vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom.
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
so
vocational singleness is a lifetime calling to singleness for the sake of the kingdom

This comes from Isaiah 56:3-5, Matthew 19:1-12, Luke 18: 28-30, Luke 20: 34-36, 1 Corinthians 7: 1-40, and 1 Timothy 5: 5-15

I’ve done a 4-hour training that thoroughly teases out this theology
If you’d like to learn more, let me know and I’ll send you my notes
The best book on this is Max Thurian’s Marriage and Celibacy

How can we thrive in vocational singleness?
voluntarily commit in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family
Vocational Singleness

[Notes]
In light of this, how can we do vocational singleness well if we’re called to it?
voluntarily commit to it in response to God’s calling
fully commit for a lifetime to receive God’s gift and longterm focus
leverage singleness for the sake of kingdom work
find lifelong, lived-in human family

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling with vocational singleness
if you’re walking out longterm singleness involuntarily
or haven’t taken the time to discern God’s calling
or haven’t made an intentional, lifelong commitment
or aren’t using your vocational singleness to serve the poor and need in some meaningful way
or are trying to do vocational singleness alone or with a revolving door of roommates and church family
then perhaps you’ll find thriving by leaning into one of those
Share
What steps might your church need to take to support thriving in vocational singleness, regardless of sexual orientation?

[Notes]
What steps might your church need to take to support thriving in vocational singleness, regardless of sexual orientation?

Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Now let’s talk about Christian marriage




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

Christian marriage…

Christian marriage is joined, entered into, and sustained by God in ways other marriages are not.
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage
Christian = joined, entered into, and sustained by God
Christian marriage is not just natural marriage as God designed at Creation
Christian marriage is natural marriage plus a gospel purpose revealed by Christ’s life, death, and resurrection
God does not join, enter into, or sustain a non-Christian marriage in the same way He does a Christian marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment…

Matthew 5:32, Romans 7:2-3, and 1 Cor 7:10-11,39 provide no grounds for divorce
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment
God expects that our vows to our spouse be permanent.

In Matthew 19, Jesus calls God’s people back to lifelong monogamy, declaring that Moses allowed the Jewish people to divorce,
giving them over to their broken desires, because their hearts were hardened to God and His created intention.

Then Jesus seemingly provides an exception to this high standard of permanence,
but other presentations of this episode in other Gospels lack this exception,
and Jesus teaches clearly in Matthew 5:32 that if you marry someone who has been divorced, you commit adultery, without any exception.

Paul confirms Christ’s teachings in Romans 7:2-3 and 1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 39 that there are no biblical grounds for divorce.

Scholars argue that this exception in Matthew 19 is more likely allowing for separation without remarriage
or referring to dissolving a false marriage: marriages entered into under false pretenses, a marriage never consummated, or a marriage to a concubine
(1 Corinthians 5:1, Acts 15:20, Acts 15:29). 



Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman…

God instituted natural marriage between one man and one woman, confirmed by Jesus and Paul
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman

God instituted natural marriage in Genesis 2, clearly defining marriage as between one man and one woman
and established sex difference as part of what makes a marriage.

In Matthew 19, Jesus reaffirms God’s original intentions for monogamous, lifelong marriage between one man and one woman.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul does the same, stating that each husband should have only one wife, and each wife have only one husband.

Then in Ephesians 5, Paul teaches that the sexual difference in Christian marriage is meant to reflect to differentness in Christ’s relationship with the Church.




Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children.

God’s procreation mandate stands for those called to Christian marriage
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
Christian marriage is a lifetime commitment between one man and one woman to raise children
I want to be clear, raising children is not the only good thing enjoyed in marriage, but it is in particular what sets it apart from vocational singleness
Obviously, just life vocational singleness, it is a call to embody the gospel and enjoy healthy intimacy

But since the beginning of time, marriage was meant to be a space to raise children. In Genesis 1: 28, God commands the first marriage to “be fruitful and increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.” This procreation mandate is affirmed in Genesis 9 and Psalm 127. Raising children is a central purpose of Christian marriage, and God’s command for Christian marriages to raise children was never rescinded.(note, I’ve been careful to say raise children, and not necessarily have children. As a rule, a Christian marriage is a space to raise children, whether that be one’s own or as foster or adoptive parents. While infrequent, there are always exceptions to the rule.)


Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, & life-giving to remind us that
God will never abandon us
there is beautiful differentness in the Trinity & between Jesus+Church
the Trinity & Jesus+Church are life-sustaining
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
in particular, it's important that Christian marriage is lifetime, complementary, and life-giving.

Christian marriages are supposed to be for a lifetime. There are very few grounds for Biblical divorce and remarriage.
This faithfulness in Christian marriage displays the gospel because it remind us that God will never abandon us.

Christian marriages are supposed to be complimentary. The complementarity of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically in Christian marriage
displays the gospel by pointing back to the different-ness in the Trinity and between Christ and the Church.

And Christian marriage are supposed to be a space for raising children,
pointing us back to the life-giving nature of the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church.

How can we thrive in Christian marriage?
Commit intentionally after a period of discernment
Seen as a gift/calling from God to labor
Recognize the gospel nature + potential to testify to Christ’s love
Take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
Revere lifetime nature
Christian Marriage

[Notes]
In light of this, how can couples thrive in Christian marriage?
make sure your marriage is entered into intentionally after a period of discernment
see your marriage as a gift and calling from God to labor for the sake of the kingdom
recognize the gospel nature of your Christian marriage and potential to testify to Christ’s love
take seriously God’s invitation to raise children for the sake of the kingdom
recognize that divorce in God’s eye is almost never an option (so dig deep)

This also highlights what the solution might be if you’re struggling in your Christian marriage
taking your marriage for granted as something the universe owes you
seeing your marriage as ordinary and for your own happiness
believing that a call to Christian marriage is less sacrificial or less kingdom-focused than celibacy
stewarding the marriage to maximize your comfort instead of your kingdom impact
resisting the difficult work of maintaining the marriage by allowing yourself to consider divorce
Share
How does inconsistency around the lifelong and life-raising nature of Christian marriage impact our credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
How does inconsistency around the lifelong and life-raising nature of Christian marriage impact our credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom?

Why follow God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
SKIP???

admittedly, these are high standards for sexual stewardship
this is culturally inconvenient wisdom
so why follow it?


If a god exists, he’s the God of the Bible, and that God knows what is best for us—we’d be fools not to follow God’s wisdom

God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life
Why follow God’s wisdom?

[Notes]
God seems to have a lot of rules for how we should seek out intimacy and family.
Why follow God’s wisdom about intimacy and family?

If we believe that a god exists, if we believe that god is the God of the Bible, and if we believe that God knows what is best for us
—if we really believe all of those things, we would be fools not to follow God’s wisdom.

If Lebron James was your basketball coach and you ignored his advice about how to become a better basketball player, you’d be a fool!
How much better advice does God have about the ways to enjoy the most goodness and beauty and meaning in this life? Trust Him!

We have been designed, by God, for specific purposes. That matters.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we allow ourselves to live in ways we weren’t designed to, we get hurt.
We shouldn’t be surprised that when we use romance, marriage, and sex contrary to God’s design, it brings pain to our lives.

If God’s wisdom is best for us, following His teachings will save us from unnecessary pain of figuring out the best paths through trial and error.
Plus, God’s wisdom will lead us to the deepest experiences of joy and purpose and true pleasure in this life.

God’s Love & Wisdom
How to respond when someone comes out
Soft skills in sexual minority pastoral care
How to invite everyone to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
Navigating challenging theological questions in 1-on-1 discipleship

[Notes]
so you’ve built rapport with a gay person you’re ministering to
you’ve offered compassionate pastoral care
your church has already been inviting straight people to steward their sexualities in God-honoring ways
and now you’ve invited the gay person you’re ministering to to do the same
but then some tricky theological questions specifically related to LGBT+ people come up in 1-on-1 discipleship
tough questionsin discipleship

[Notes]
what are some of those?
and how can you respond?
Pastoral Care Question 1
How do I know what God's wisdom is? Did Jesus even talk about gay people? Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

We discover God’s best for us by reading His Scriptures with the historic Church.

[Notes]
here’s our first tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

How do I know what God's wisdom is?
Did Jesus even talk about gay people?
Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

Here’s how I’d respond:
I believe God made the world perfectly, He gave us choice, and then humans chose to disobey Him. 
Our sin bent everything about the world, yet God looked back at the world, He noticed what would bring us harm,
but he also noticed the ways His best still shined through.

So He revealed to us in His Scripture what would bring us harm and what His best still is for us,
and He gave us the Church to read and interpret the Scriptures with

Whenever a Christian asks a question about morality, the right question to ask isn’t, “What can I get away with?”
Instead, it’s “What is God’s best for me?”
And we answer that question by studying His Scriptures
and discovering whether there’s a historic Christian consensus or a contemporary global Christian consensus on the question 
Pastoral Care Question 1
The whole of Scripture reveals God’s best for everyone’s sexuality: vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

We just need to read the words of Jesus.

[Notes]
But when we ask, “What’s God’s best for gay people?”,
we don’t even need to look at the verses that many believe call same-sex sexuality activity a sin.
They are meaningful evidence, but I don’t think they’re necessary to know God’s wisdom for my sexuality.

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not those few passages, but the whole of Scripture.
Consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives,
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness.
When it comes to what to do with our capacities for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear.
There are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

To arrive at that, we just need to read the words of Jesus…
Pastoral Care Question 1
In Matthew 19, Jesus defines marriage as a lifetime commitment between one woman and one man to serve God.

Then Jesus offers the alternative of lifetime abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

[Notes]
In twelve verses in Matthew 19, Jesus tells us everything we need to know

Jesus calls His people back to God’s original intentions for marriage
A lifelong marriage between one woman and one man to serve God, not themselves

And then Jesus introduces an alternative
Permanently giving up romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention

Those are God’s best for us
Christian marriage or vocational singleness
Regardless of sexual orientation

That’s what a vast majority of Christians have believe over the past 2,000 years
And that’s what the majority of global Christians believe today
Pastoral Care Question 1
Love = Willing the good of the other
Love = Empathy + Wisdom
Empathy – Wisdom ≠ Love
Wisdom – Empathy ≠ Love

[Notes]
Now some would respond, “But a loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage”

The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,”
that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that.

It’s saying that God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest.
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is.

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer.
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers.
How do we know what God wants to offer us? By reading the Scriptures with the historic Church!

But it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things.
We have to help people take hold of them.
We have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive.

So love = empathy + wisdom
empathy without wisdom isn’t love
wisdom without empathy isn’t love

If we want to imitate God and love people,
we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to His wisdom and help them do so
Pastoral Care Question 2
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
SKIP???

here’s a second set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 2
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Now to the second question: Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 2
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 2
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Did God intend for me to be gay? Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.

[Notes]
Did God intend for me to be gay?
Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Well, as I understand it, Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God does not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction
or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.

Yet I experience same-sex attractions,
so clearly God allowed it, even if it wasn’t his intentions for me!
How does that make sense?
We’ll come back to that…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall.

All of us were corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us.

[Notes]
What, then, are same-sex attractions?

Well, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall.

I believe that when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world,
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.

None of us are how God intended.
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin.

So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction.

But because I was born into a broken world,
one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a brokenness and temptation, but it is not a sin.

While we don’t choose who we’re attracted to, we do choose how we steward our desires.

[Notes]
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Yet while we don’t choose who we are attracted to, 
We do choose how we respond.
Every person is responsible for stewarding their sexuality in God-honoring ways, regardless of their sexual orientation.
Share
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

[Notes]
Which of these questions would you struggle most to hold space for? Facilitate conversation around? Why?

Pastoral Care Question 4
Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

God has the power to do miracles, and scientific studies have shown sexual orientation change efforts to be harmfully ineffective.

[Notes]
SKIP???

maybe you’ll be asked this fourth tough question:

Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

Here’s how I’d respond:

I want to be clear: there is no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
There’s no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation.

Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts
experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts).

Pastoral Care Question 4
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when asked, how is that fair?

Why do bad things happen to innocent people?

[Notes]
Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:

If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing,
how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: Why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation.
They’re innocent.
So why?

Pastoral Care Question 4
For our choices to love God and each other to matter, God chooses to allow the consequences of our decisions to play out (including our mistaken decisions).

[Notes]
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
It’s the theological concept of free process.

If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choice?
No

So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something,
God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Same-sex attractions develop because of the sins of others, going all the way back to Adam and Eve.

To protect free will, God allows people to develop same-sex attractions.

[Notes]
How do I think that applies to broken sexuality?

I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others.

Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations, going all the way back to Adam and Even.
Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.
There is no evidence that less-than-ideal parenting or sexual abuse increases a person’s likelihood of developing same-sex attractions.

But then to protect my free will,
God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Yet, God has promised to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good!

[Notes]
Thankfully, God has promised us
(and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good.

It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life.

Pastoral Care Question 5
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our fifth set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
Most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:
At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.

Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshiping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been followed a revisionist sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 5
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 5
Yet, churches have often promoted a double standard of sexual stewardship.

They taught that straight people need romance and can assume marriage, but then taught the opposite for gay people.

[Notes]
Okay, so maybe embodying God’s wisdom in the best ways can actually be good
But historically, has it been fair?

Admittedly, no.

Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Churches lost credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom, and it hurt straight people.

Instead, we can raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship.

[Notes]
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, I think churches ought to invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.

This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance,
having sex outside of marriage, making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography,
failing to consider a call to vocational singleness, unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.

These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God’s inconvenient wisdom
and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.
Pastoral Care Question 6
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
and here’s our last set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 6
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
SKIP

Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
SKIP

Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
SKIP

And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
AS WE’VE ALREADY TALKED ABOUT

Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.

After college, I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
Unfortunately, each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.

Then in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie (my former Anglican priest)
to share that I felt called to vocational singleness but didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
I asked, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus seven of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you

If you’d like to ask a question
Learn how Equip partners with churches like yours
OR
Access free articles + videos for pastors, parents, & in Spanish

Please go to equipyourcommunity.org/nextstep
Or open up the camera on your phone and point it at the QR code on the screen

And I’ll follow up with you soon!

Also, we get to train pastors to offer Christ’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people
and equip parents to lead their kids in age-appropriate conversation about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexuality
because of generous donors just like you
At the link and the QR code, there’s an opportunity to check that you’re interested in donating to make this work possible
Please prayerfully consider doing so
Together, let’s help our churches and families become places where LGBT+ people belong and thrive according to God’s wisdom
Share
What aha-moments, comments that showed growth, or ideas from others gave you hope for Trinity?
What next steps could Trinity take that would give you hope?

[Notes]
What are the benefits and challenges of framing sexuality around “made for connection in community with two paths for that” instead of “save sex for marriage”?

Does your community believe we need romance to be whole/fulfilled?

q&a
Sexual addiction
Using porn, masturbating, or having sex more frequently than they’d like to without the ability to reduce/stop
Reduce access with filters, blocks, and accountability
Meet intimacy needs in healthy ways and connect with painful emotions

[Notes]
If a person you’re ministering to uses pornography, masturbates, or engages in sex with others
More frequently than they would like to
And they are unable to reduce/stop
Then they may have an addictive relationship with sex

I want to be clear: LGBT+ does not automatically mean sex addict
But, for many gay people who have felt the need to hide their sexuality and experience anxiety and depression from that hiding
Porn offers escape/numbing from painful emotions
And a false sense of connecting with others they are secretly drawn to
So gay people are particularly vulnerable to developing addictive habits with pornography

So what do you do?
Reduce Access and Meet the Real Need
Reduce access by taking practical steps to make it more difficult to see pornography or use dating apps
Filters on devices
Accountability reports to peers

And meet the real need
What sexual addiction covers up are painful emotions we don’t want to connect with
And loneliness
So teach those you minister to to notice their emotions and honor them
That painful emotions are unavoidable, but if we postpone them, they just get worse
And encourage them to meet their needs for connection in healthy ways
But emphasize that being lonely doesn’t necessarily mean to need romance or sex
It just means we need people in our life who we can be honest with and will be honest with us
People who we know their story and they know ours
People who feel safe and who we can spend time with
So help them identify people he could be that kind of friend for them
And encourage them to cultivate that friendship
