Historic Sexual Ethicsw/ University Christian Church

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
ABOUT
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 20,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, Christian universities, and campus ministries.
Mission
Results

[Notes]
Equip is the premier consulting and training solution for churches aspiring to be places where gay Christians thrive for a lifetime according to a historic sexual ethic. 

Trained over 20,000 Christian leaders in 250 trainings at 85 different churches, christian universities, and campus ministries.

Our Blueprint Process has been proven to deepen theological confidence and expand pastoral skills, including statistically significant growth in churches’ posture toward LGBT+ care and theology of marriage, vocational singleness, and God’s wisdom for gay people.

Our trainees reported the following:
90% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
85% feel ready to have respectful conversation about sexual ethics
94% found EQUIP trainings to be effective or very effective
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

Historic Sexual Ethics
How’d I get there?
What do I believe?
Why?
Why not the alternatives?

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today
So I’d like to share with you how I got there
What, precisely, I am convinced of
Why
and why I’m not convinced of the alternatives
how’d I get there?

[Notes]
Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly
I grew up being taught and believing ex-gay theology
because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But I’m still gay
that didn’t seem to be how God thought about these things

Then I got to college at a top 15 university
and I met smart, Jesus-loving people in college who had different interpretations of scripture
this was disorienting for sexual ethics
but more importantly, for my whole understanding of the scriptures and God’s wisdom and faith

I’d grown up being taught that God’s wisdom in Scripture is self-evident to every Bible-believing Christian
and we’ll all come to the same conclusions
but this fantasy was shattered

crisis of faith: how do we know God’s wisdom? can we know God’s wisdom? is God even real?

I dealt with serious doubt that nearly destroyed my faith
doubt continues today, but I choose to live with doubt as opposed to let it destroy my faith

then turning to God’s wisdom
some say HS, but God can’t be of two minds
not self-evident
human interpretation unavoidable
pope in rome or a pope in the mirrow (or something in between)

so studied all the in-betweens
and struck by the fact that Jesus told us he would give us the Church,
led by his Apostles and their successors, to teach the scriptures and lead his people

and that for a vast majority of Christian history, every Christian believed that the church leaders
who could trace their authority back to the Apostles
were the imperfect leaders God had given us to interpret the Scriptures for us
not that they would always teach perfectly
or that any one of them had the secret sauce

but when there’s a strong consensus among the successors of the Apostles,
yet I arrive at a different conclusion, I’m almost certainly wrong

that if I default to the interpretations of the historic Church, the Great Tradition
and make decisions in my life in light of that wisdom
(and still wrestle with my doubts about whether the historic Church is right)
then my life, on average, will be much better than if I just followed my own wisdom
Historic Sexual Ethics
Does God exist?
Does that God know what’s best for me better than I do?
Do I know that God’s best by reading the Scriptures with the historic Church?

[Notes]
and for me, that’s what answered the question of sexual ethics

you see, I think disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely really about sexual ethics
usually, it’s actually about disagreement on one of three more fundamental questions

Does God exist?
Does that God know what’s best for me better than I do?
Do I know that God’s best by reading the Scriptures with the historic Church?

to be honest, I’ve yet to meet someone who also says “yes” to each of these questions
but comes to meaningfully different conclusions about sexual ethics

and I think that would be my topline recommendation to you
ultimately, what you believe about sexual ethics is going to be determined by your framework for interpreting Scripture
I beg you, don’t let the tail wag the dog
don’t let yourself become convinced of one sexual ethic or another for emotional reasons
or even seemingly intellectual reasons
and then reverse engineer a framework for interpreting Scripture that leads to the sexual ethic you want to hold

instead, figure out what’s your church’s framework for interpreting Scripture
and my hunch is, after you have that, the rest will be easy

so for me, as I’ll describe more later, when I read the whole of Scripture, with the historic Church,
there’s overwhelmingly more evidence for historic sexual ethics
than for ex-gay theology or a revisionist sexual ethic
and listen, I tried both
I tried to convince myself of both
and I’ve tried to live out both
but as I’ll share more later, my story and the story of so many others confirm that both of those are dangerous extremes
Historic Sexual Ethics
How’d I get there?
What do I believe?
Why?
Why not the alternatives?
what do I believe?
What do I believe?
Being gay is a result of the Fall. God did not intend for me to be gay.
Being gay is a brokenness, but it is not a sin.
God does not send people to hell merely for being gay.
Attractions, orientation, identity, and behavior are different

[Notes]
So what do I believe?

well first, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall
That when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world.
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.
None of us are how God intended
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin
So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world, that God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction
But because I was born into a broken world, one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions
 
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Fourth, Let me also point out at this point that there’s a big difference between attractions, orientation, identity, and behaviors
And when Christians on either extreme conflates these, it causes big problems
Same-sex attractions can be nothing more than infrequent or one-time recognition that someone of the same-sex is physically or sexually attractive
A same-sex sexual orientation is a consistent pattern of same-sex attractions
Same-sex sexual identity involves identifying as gay either by name and/or by participating in gay culture in ways that can be small like putting a rainbow sticker on one’s car
Same-sex sexual behavior consists of romantic and sexual activity
What I want you to see is that a Christian can experience infrequent same-sex attractions but not have a same-sex sexual orientation
A Christian can have a same-sex sexual orientation, but choose not to identify as gay
A same-sex attracted Christian can identify as gay but choose not to engage in same-sex romantic and sexual activity
But the extremes in the conversation want to deny that that nuance is possible
Those on the Left argue that all of these must line up in a particular direction, or the person is practicing self-hate
And people on the Right argue that in order to faithfully refrain from gay sex, a person must also find a way to eliminate their same-sex attractions or at least pretend they don’t experience them anymore
What do I believe?
We do not choose who we are attracted to, but we choose how we respond.
A mix of nature and nurture contribute to the development of sexual orientation.
There is no proven formula for changes a persons’ attractions.

[Notes]
Fifth, I also don’t believe people choose who they are attracted to, choose to be gay or straight,
But we do choose how we respond

Sixth, The consensus of scientists is that people develop their sexual attractions through a mix of nature and nurture, but people do not choose who they are attracted to
There is also no formula for changing a person’s attractions: no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation
Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts experience no change in their sexual orientation, but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts)

Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing, how is that fair?
At the core of that question is the timeless question: why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation
They’re innocent
So why?
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people, God has to let the consequences of our decisions play out
It’s the theological concept of free process
If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others, would their choices have been real choice?
No
So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something, God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out
How does that apply to broken sexuality?
We believe that gay people developed this brokenness because of the sins of others
Brokenness in their genes passed on through generations
Sin in the different environments they grew up in
And to protect free will, God chose not to swoop in and prevent them from developing SSAs by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others

Thankfully, God has promised us (and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life) that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good
It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life
What do I believe?
God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage.
There is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses.
Same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context.

[Notes]
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?

Well, as I understand it, and as a majority of Christians have understood the Bible for 2,000 years,
God calls all Christians to a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)
there is no context for same-sex sexual or romantic activity that God blesses in Scripture
same-sex sexual and romantic activity are sins in any context

What I hope you notice is that I’m staking out a moderate, middle-way position here
I’m rejecting a progressive sexual ethic that abandons historic biblical wisdom to one extreme
And I’m rejecting pray-the-gay-away theology that’s caused 1000s of suicides on the other extreme
Instead, I’m holding on to both compassion and conviction
Historic Sexual Ethics
How’d I get there?
What do I believe?
Why?
Why not the alternatives?
why?

[Notes]
now you might be wondering: this understanding is terribly inconvenient for me
how am I convinced that this is how God sees it?
most people start with the six passages in Scripture that many claim directly calls gay sex a sin
They are often called “the clobber passages”

I’m not going to get into those.
I think they are meaningful evidence,
but there’s also reasonable ways some people cast doubt on how convincing those 6 passages are

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not these few passages, but the whole of Scripture
consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness
When it comes to what to do with our capacity for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear
there are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Jesus and Paul had a lot to say about both of those
they praised both and described both as having a specific design
Why do I believe?
Vocational singleness: give up romance to do kingdom work parents can’t (Matt 19, 1 Cor 7)
Christian marriage: lifelong partnership between a Christian man and women to enjoy intimacy and raise children (Matt 19, Eph 5)
or

[Notes]
In Matthew 19 and 1 Corinthians 7, they spoke of a committed singleness
where one gives up romance and marriage and sex to do kingdom work parents have a hard time finding the time and energy to carry out

And in Matthew 19 and Ephesians 5, Jesus and Paul spoke of Christian marriage
as a lifelong partnership between a Christian man and woman
for the purposes of enjoying intimacy with each other, raising children, and embodying the gospel

you see, the Christian should not approach God or the Bible with the question,
“What is permissible, when it comes to my sexuality? What can I get away with?”
instead, we should ask, “What is most wise and most good? What is God’s best when it comes to my sexuality?”

God’s best for how all Christians should steward their sexuality is clear:
vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex
I’m not interested in settling for anything less than God’s best
Why do I believe?
I wish I could convince myself of a revisionist sexual ethic.

But I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic: loss of faith.

[Notes]
But beyond theology, there are compelling reasons to follow God’s wisdom as we understand it

On the one extreme, pray-the-gay-away has cause millions to lose their faith or their life

Then on the other extreme, even if I could somehow convince myself theologically
that God would bless a same-sex marriage between two Christians
I can’t ignore the bad fruit of a progressive sexual ethic in my life and the lives of others

Primarily, most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic stopped believing in God
Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:

At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.

Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshiping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been followed a revisionist sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.
Why do I believe?
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Yet, churches have often promoted a double standard of sexual stewardship, losing credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom.

They taught that straight people need romance and can assume marriage, but then taught the opposite for gay people.
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
Okay, so maybe embodying God’s wisdom in the best ways can actually be good
But historically, has it been fair?

Admittedly, no.

Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.

This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Our churches have failed to embody God’s wisdom in ways that lead to thriving for gay Christians trying to steward their sexualities according to God’s wisdom.
Why do I believe?

[Notes]
All of this has led to bad fruit in the lives of gay Christians trying to steward their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic
they are lonely, struggle with sin, and this effects their relationship with God and the Kingdom work they could do
not because they aren’t trying hard enough
and not because God’s wisdom is actually a lie
but because even the churches to believe in God’s wisdom have done a horrible job embodying that wisdom
in a way that faithful gay Christians could actually thrive

I think that’s the double burden of gay Christians:
the Church doesn’t know how to love us well,
and the alternatives culture offers still aren’t good for us either

that sucks
yet, that doesn’t make something bad for me good for me
that doesn’t change something from being a sin to edifying to God

why is this the way God made things?
you know, I don’t know
but at the end of the day, it’s not my job to question God or tell Him how to do His job
I’ve just got to trust that God knows what is best for me and obey His teachings

I don’t think the solution to the bad fruit we see is to abandon a historic sexual ethic
because there’s even worse fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic
No, the solution is for Christian communities to do a better job teaching what the Bible has to say
and embodying it in ways that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians following a traditional sexual ethic
And in the process bless every Christian in your community
the solution

[Notes]
how?
Become communities where…
Everyone is thinking theologically about their sexuality
Christians talk publicly about the challenges LGBT+ people face
Every kid knows God loves gay people
Pastors and lay leaders know how to minister to LGBT+ people
LGBT+ people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage

[Notes]
First, your community needs to invite all Christians to think theologically about their sexual stewardship.

As we’ve already mentioned, most communities fail to teach what the Bible really has to say about vocational singleness and Christian marriage or offer robust support
They enable straight Christians to ignore God’s wisdom to their own detriment
But then they call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
This is hypocritical, and leaders lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom

Instead, your community needs to invite everyone to think theologically about their sexual stewardship
You need to teach that God first calls everyone to a period of temporary singleness
during which they discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
your community should teach that every Christian has the same inherent capacity for both vocations
and every Christian, gay or straight, should offer the question of vocational singleness or Christian marriage to God.
And then your community needs to come around gay and straight people to help them faithfully live out vocational singleness or Christian marriage
 
Second, your community must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
Many churches avoid the topic of God’s love for gay people,
so the average church-goer doesn’t know how to have compassionate and theologically accurate conversations with friends.
As a result, gay people don’t know whether it is safe to share their story.
Churches that refuse to speak publicly about God’s love for gay people hurt gay Christians
and their indecision limits their ability to invest in something better.

Instead, churches must talk publicly about the cultural questions in the intersection of faith and sexuality.
With compassion and theological accuracy, churches need to explore the following questions:
How does same-sex attraction develop?
What part did God play and why?
Does same-sex attraction change?
How should gay people meet their intimacy needs?
How do gay people fit in God’s story?
How is God’s invitation to gay people good?

As a result, everyone in a church would know how to love gay people well
and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in a church who are not out yet would know what the church believes and that it is safe to share their story.

Third, churches must protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Many churches wait until a kid shares that he or she is gay to address the topic of homosexuality.
This is a problem.
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Fourth, pastors and other leads need to know how to offer compassionate one-on-one pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Many parents and pastors first react to teens sharing about their attractions
by sending teens to a therapist or a para-church ministry outside of the church to be “fixed.”
Parents and pastors don’t know how to minister to gay people well, so they outsource the care.
The shame and loneliness of gay people is amplified because their challenges are treated as weird problems that need special treatment.
They are told to make sense of a key aspect of their personhood
away from the church family they worship with, pray with, and take communion with.

Instead, churches must provide effective pastoral care to gay Christians.
They need to do what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches must recognize that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors should help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

And last but not least, churches must become places where LGBT+ people
can thrive in vocational singleness or a mixed-orientation marriage with reasonable effort

Many churches may have the right beliefs about sexual ethics,
but the pathways for sexual stewardship they offer are inviable.
They are places where few are thriving in vocational singleness or the complexities of marriage with someone of the opposite sex.
In response to the ways many have misused mixed-orientation marriage,
the pendulum has swung the opposite direction and many churches teach that vocational singleness is the only option for gay people.
But these churches never teach about lifetime singleness, there are no models in their church for doing this well,
and they don’t invite straight people to consider vocational singleness.
vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.
It begs the question: if we aren’t offering vocational singleness to straight people, do we really believe it is good?

Instead, churches need to become places where gay people could thrive in vocational singleness or Christian marriage with reasonable effort.
These churches should teach about the theology of vocational singleness in Scripture,
adults should model thriving in vocational singleness and be celebrated in the church,
and the church should invite all people—gay or straight—to discern whether God is calling them to vocational singleness or marriage.

Most importantly, these churches must be places where celibate people can find the same depth of family that married people find,
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.
Then, these churches need to teach about the possibility of mixed-orientation marriages for gay people,
cautioning against getting into these recklessly while highlighting the beauty and brokenness of real stories.
Historic Sexual Ethics
How’d I get there?
What do I believe?
Why?
Why not the alternatives?
why not the alternatives?
Why not the alternatives?
Jesus didn’t talk about gay sex
The Bible doesn’t talk about gay people
The Bible was wrong about slavery and women
God makes people gay
Sexual orientation doesn’t change
Lifetime abstinence is unrealistic
Mixed-orientation marriages usually fail
The evangelical sexual ethic causes suicide
Marriage is about commitment and companionship
 A loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage

[Notes]
if we had time, I’d be interested in addressing each of the most convinced arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
and pointing out why each of them fall flat

I’ll send you access to a video article addressing all of these

but in short
Jesus defined marriage as being between a man and a woman,
and he taught that the only alternative was celibate singleness
While the clobber passages aren’t necessary to know God’s wisdom for our sexualities,
they provide meaningfully more evidence for a historic sexual ethic than a revisionist sexual ethic

The Bible isn’t concern with sexual orientation
But there have always been same-sex attracted people
The authors of Scripture were aware of loving, monogamous same-sex couples
And the concern of Scripture is consistently same-sex sexual activity, regardless of sexual orientation

The Scriptures actually treat slavery and female leadership very differently than gay sex,
showing a trajectory toward modern views on slavery and female leadership,
but consistently calling gay sex a sin and upholding a broader sexual ethic for all people
without a trajectory toward something different

As we’ve already address, science can’t tell us God’s intentions. None of us are how God made us to be.
And Romans 1 clarifies that same-sex attractions are broken, not intended.
Additionally, while it’s true, that there’s no formula for changing sexual orientation,
we know God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay and He still warns us from engaging in same-sex sexual activity.

It’s true, long-term abstinent singleness hasn’t work out well for gay people.
But, God calls all Christians to abstinent singleness outside of opposite-sex Christian marriage.
Vocational singleness isn’t working because straight people aren’t doing it and churches aren’t supporting it.

It’s true, some MOMs ended disastrously because of secrecy.
But, MOMs can be healthy with transparency. We should not dismiss the possibility for those called to a MOM.

It’s true, churches in the 80s, 90s, and 00s mixed historic sex ethics with pray-the-gay-away theology,
leading to loss of faith and life.
But, there’s just as bad (if not worse) fruit of a revisionist sexual ethic.
It’s churches’ responsibility to become places where gay Christians can thrive with reasonable effort according to God’s wisdom.

It’s true, straight Christians have often taught that marriage is about commitment and companionship.But, the Bible + Church have consistently taught that Christian marriage (joined, sustained by God)
is a lifetime union between a man and woman to raise children and embody the gospel.

It’s true, God is the author of love, but that means that to know what love really is, we but search for what God says love is.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things God has to offer and helping them take hold of that.














questions?

[Notes]
How can you respond with the love, wisdom, and patience of Jesus when a student comes out to you?

 Ask a Q , Stay Connected

equipyourcommunity.org/contact

[Notes]
Thanks for the opportunity to dive into this conversation with all of you
