JESUS & SEXUALITY
ABOUT PIETER
Writer/speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, and sexuality

Executive Director of Equip

Teacher/aspiring deacon in the ACNA

Founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers

Licensed Professional Counselor

[Notes]
my name is Pieter Valk
I’m a writer and speaker about discernment, vocational singleness, & LGBT+ topics according to a traditional sexual ethic
published in places like Christianity Today
 
I’m the founder and executive Director of Equip
 
I’m a teacher and aspiring deacon in the Anglican Church in North America about celibacy and sexuality
 
I’m the founding brother of the Nashville Family of Brothers
an ecumenical monastery building family for men called to vocational singleness
 
I’m a licensed professional counselor specialized in serving gay Christians hoping to steward their sexualities according to a traditional sexual ethic
 
And I graduated with Highest Honors in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, studied at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and earned a Master's in Clinical Mental Health Counseling at Lipscomb University
 
each of my jobs has to do with sexuality and finding belong in the body of Christ
this work matter to me
because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic sexual ethic
ABOUT PIETER
Historic Sexual Ethic
A belief that God’s best for every Christian is either vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention) or Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

[Notes]
Here’s what I mean when I say a historic sexual ethic
a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either what I call vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)
or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of opposite-sex Christian marriage with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

What “Christians” believe…
If God gives people desires to marry and have kids, then He wants them to marry
Marriage is primarily about companionship and mutual fulfillment
If we get married, we only have to have kids if and when we want them
God calls a select few to vocational singleness and sustains them spiritually
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close

[Notes]
But first, I want to set the scene by highlighting what I think the average American believes about sexual stewardship
What do I mean by this phrase sexual stewardship? Well, recognizing that God created all of us to be in community and with the capacity for romantic relationship, how do we make good decisions about those things across our lifespan?

Problems:
Assumption of marriage
Marriage is self-serving
Not submitting question of kids to God
No responsibility for single people in the church
Idolatry of marriage

JESUS & SEXUALITY

[Notes]
In contrast, how should we think about sexual stewardship?
Well perhaps a good way to start is to look at what Jesus said and did when it came to his sexuality

JESUS & SEXUALITY
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider vocational singleness and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage

[Notes]
Here’s what I’m going to share with you
We’ll tease these out, and then we will explore what we do with this and why is matters to us
Never married
Jesus never married and was celibate
No direct references but taught since the Early Church
Some point to Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2

[Notes]
He never married and was celibate
This has been the understanding and teaching of the Church since the early Church
Some reference Ephesians 5:24 and Revelation 21:2 as further evidence — the Church is the bride of Christ, so he can have no other bride
A simple but important fact

Never married
If the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish? To what extent do we need romance, marriage, and sex?
12

[Notes]
if the example of our faith had a full human existence without romance or sex, what does that say about what is necessary for us to flourish?
Should challenge us that those things aren’t necessary to flourish
But that’s what culture tells us is fulfilling
So should leave us with the question, “What is necessary for flourishing?”

Encouraged kingdom singleness
Jesus talked about marriage & vocational singleness in Matthew 19:1-12
Raised the standard of commitment in marriage
Encouraged vocational singleness
Compared to eunuchs (voluntary and involuntary)

[Notes]
He talked about marriage and celibacy and ultimately encouraged vocational singleness and said that it was given, not chosen
Let’s Read Matthew 19:1-12 and then we’ll talk about what that means for us

1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan. 2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.3 Some Pharisees came to him to test him. They asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”4 “Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’[a] 5 and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’[b]? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”7 “Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”8

Classic Pharisees—they are trying to test Jesus. Either he comes out against God’s purposes for marriage or the exceptions Moses allowed.

Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. 9 I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”10

Jesus says that God’s intention was also for marriage to be lifelong and Moses only allowed divorce because he gave people over to their sin. He then raises the standard for divorce and the level of commitment one should have in marriage.

The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”11

The disciples think this is a ridiculously high standard and joke that it would be better to just stay single.

Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. 12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”

And Jesus responds by saying, “No joke, it would be better for you to marry”. But it’s not for everyone. Some have been given a capacity to accept Christ’s teachings about marriage—the gift of marriage. And others have been given a capacity to accept Christ’s teaching about vocational singleness—the gift of celibacy. We will talk about this more later, but in the for the Israelites, marriage and procreation was a commandment, so for Jesus to suggest that it would be good for someone to be single for a lifetime is pretty radical. Additionally, he makes a comparison to eunuchs to not the permanent, irreversible nature of the kind of intentional committed singleness Jesus is commending.
Jesus encouraged his disciples to consider vocational singleness and recognized that calling as given.

Most of us assume we will get married. How might Christ’s invitation to consider vocational singleness challenge the assumption of marriage? Are we truly open to being called to vocational singleness?
25
Encouraged kingdom singleness

[Notes]
We tend to think vocational singleness is voluntary and nice for those who choose it. But we want to get married. If instead celibacy is given, how should we think about our own calling? How should we be discerning our call? Are we willing to be celibate if God calls us to that?
A new covenant
Christ’s sacrifice established a new covenant in Ephesians 1:3-14
Adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s sacrifice
Marriage and procreation are still good but not commandments

[Notes]
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage and procreation were no longer commandments
the promises God made to His people in the Old Testament were promises of temporal flourishing fulfilled through offspring, so procreation was a commandment
but Christ’s sacrifice establishes a new covenant: Ephesians 1:3-14
Let’s read Ephesians 1:3-14

3 Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ. 4 For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love 5 he[a] predestined us for adoption to sonship[b] through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will— 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves. 7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace 8 that he lavished on us. With all wisdom and understanding, 9 he[c] made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ, 10 to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ.11 In him we were also chosen,[d] having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will, 12 in order that we, who were the first to put our hope in Christ, might be for the praise of his glory. 13 And you also were included in Christ when you heard the message of truth, the gospel of your salvation. When you believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God’s possession—to the praise of his glory.

Previously, to be in God’s family you had to be born a Jew and maintain that relationship with God through sacrifices
But in this letter Paul is proclaiming that the Greeks in the Church in Ephesus are now in the family of God
we are adopted into God’s family by faith through Christ’s work on the cross
while marriage and procreation are still good, they are no longer necessary to fulfill God’s promises and they are no longer commanded
A new covenant
What might it look like for vocational singles to be spiritually procreative? How could we use our availability to bring healing to our communities?
34

[Notes]
People of the Old Testament saw marrying and having children as a beautiful way to obey God and fulfill His promises. How can we learn to see vocational singleness and spiritual procreation in the same way? What might it look like for celibate Christians to be spiritually procreative? How could we use our availability to bring healing to our communities?

20 years of 40-hr work weeks

Imagine a powerful minority using their availability to address brokenness in our communities such as wealth inequality, racial divide, homelessness, poor treatment of immigrants and refugees, the challenges faced by single mothers, an epidemic of mental illness, and marginalization of LGBT+ people—in short, bring the gospel alive in a way that draws people to Jesus. 

Our churches don’t talk about vocational singleness
They don’t celebrate celibate people
They don’t really support vocational singleness
A celibate future
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Matt 22:30 - There will be no marriage, sex, or romance in the New Heaven and New Earth (NHNE)
Christ’s life is an example of how we will live and his resurrection starts the process of realizing NHNE

[Notes]
Christ’s resurrection brings about a future where we are all celibate
Christ’ resurrection begins the process of redeeming creation and bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth
NHNE is a physical place, not floating spiritual orbs
And in Matthew 22:30 Jesus says “At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.”
Christ revealed that in the New Heaven and New Earth, there will be no marriage or sex or romance
So Christ’s life of celibacy is an example of how we will live in the next life
And his resurrection put in motion the work of redeeming creation, bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth, and realizing this place where there is neither marriage nor sex

Contemporaries of early Christians saw marriage as a necessity to secure physical protection, wealth, and a legacy through descendants.
So when Christians called to vocational singleness enjoyed just as much family, belonging, and honor in early Christian communities as married people,
they provided Christians with a preview of and hope for a New Heavens and New Earth where God would keep us safe, provide everything we needed, and would never forget us. 

But today, we seem interested in romance and marriage because they promise a way to find faithful love and escape loneliness.
So modern Christian vocational singleness, when done well, can uniquely testify to the fullness of God’s love by previewing a time when we don’t have to compete—
to be more attractive or intelligent or funny than others—in order to be loved by others and belong in a family.
Christians are supposed to be able to look at those in vocational singleness,
see them enjoying intimate community without the need for romance, exclusivity, or competing for each others’ affection;
and that preview should give every Christian hope for the fullness of God’s love in the kingdom to come.
A celibate future
Would seeing a community of vocational singles enjoying faithful family without the need to compete for exclusivity give you hope?

Did you see that in your church growing up? Why not?
41

[Notes]
Would seeing a community of celibate Christians enjoying faithful family without the need to compete for exclusivity give you hope?
Did you see that in your church growing up? Why not?

JESUS & SEXUALITY
The example of our faith never married or had sex
He encouraged his disciples to consider vocational singleness and taught that it was given
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage is no longer a commandment
His resurrection began the process of establishing our future where there is no marriage

[Notes]
So Jesus + Sexuality
The example of our faith never married or had sex, so they are not necessary for a full human life
He encouraged his disciples to consider vocational singleness and taught that celibacy was given, not chosen, so we too should discern our calling
His sacrifice established a new covenant where marriage was no longer necessary to fulfill his promises, so celibacy is equally good and should be celebrated
His resurrection started the work of bringing about the New Heaven and the New Earth where we will all be celibate, perhaps lifting it up as a higher calling

But wait!
Does that mean Jesus is calling us to live lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?

NO!

[Notes]
But wait, does that mean Jesus is calling us to lonely, celibate, isolated lives where we starve ourselves of relationship so that we can glorify God?
NO!

Created for intimacy
We were created for intimacy with God and other people
While many of you will get married, Christ redefines family to make the Body of Christ our first family (Mark 3:31-35)
Yet, we will always experience some loneliness

[Notes]
We are created for intimacy with God and with other people
We all need connection, relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive love
We all need emotional, spiritual, and physical connection
We are all created to enjoy those in the context of family
And many of you will end up getting married and that will be a beautiful source of relationship and family
But Christ redefines that to—he calls us to see the Body of Christ as our first family (Mark 3:31-35)

31 Then Jesus’ mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent someone in to call him. 32 A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.”
33 “Who are my mother and my brothers?” he asked.
34 Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, “Here are my mother and my brothers! 35 Whoever does God’s will is my brother and sister and mother.”

Jesus is hanging out with the disciples and others learning from him
Mother and brother ask him to come outside
Basically, “Hey, we’re you’re family, we’re you’re first priority, come outside”
And he rejects that idea that his biological family is his first priority
Instead, he says that the family of God, other Christians, are his first family and his first priority

So yes we are created for intimacy with God and other people, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that that will be fulfilled in a biological family
We can find that same family in relationship with other Christians

Yet, we also need to recognize that because this world is broken, we will always be lonely. Even if we end up getting married and we have a great relationship with God
Challenging culture
What do we do with Christ’s life and teachings about vocational singleness, marriage, romance, and sex?

Wrestle with the conflict between Christ’s life and teachings and culture’s narrative of romantic and sexual fulfillment.

[Notes]
So what should we do with Christ’s teachings about celibacy, marriage, romance, and sex?
He encourages celibacy, that sex and romance are not necessary for a full life, that marriage and procreation are no longer commandments, and that we will all be celibate in the next life
At the very least, this is in stark contrast to culture’s narrative about romantic and sexual fulfillment
We need to wrestle with that conflict and be open to God changing the ways we think about romance and sex
My challenge to you
Do you really think sexual and romantic fulfillment are necessary to be fully human?
Do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
If not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?

[Notes]
So what I want to leave you with is this:
regardless of whether you are a Christian or not
I challenge you to consider the modern narrative about sexual and romantic fulfillment
do you really think those are necessary to be fully human?
do you really think you can demand those from society or from God?
And if not, how can we build a community together where people don’t have to be married to find family?

JESUS & SEXUALITY
