


LOVING

LGBT+ PEOPLE




[Notes]
Pieter Valk, Exective Director of EQUIP
Many LGBT people have sworn off God because of how the Church has treated LGBT+ people
Pastors, lay leaders, parents, and every day Christians don’t have what they need to love and minister well



Our Mission
To equip the Church with the understanding and skills to better love and serve those who experience same-sex attraction




[Notes]
terms



Our Stats
4 Churches + 2 Universities
500 Christian Leaders for 1330 hours of training
92% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
94% found training to be effective or very effective
99% feel more ready to be a friend to sexual minorities






Our Vision
We want the Church we leave our children to be one where boys and girls grow up hearing their parents, friends, and pastors talk about sexuality in compassionate and meaningful ways . And if those boys and girls find themselves attracted to other boys or girls of the same sex, we want them to be able to share with their parents, friends, or pastors without fear or shame.




[Notes]
our vision
why this matters to me



Training Goal
To equip the Vanderbilt AACF Servant Team with the understanding and skills to minister to LGBT+ persons and to develop a vision for the ministry of Vanderbilt AACF to LGBT+ people






Training Objectives
Growing in Empathy for LGBT+ People & Exploring Biblical Sexuality
Developing a Posture toward the Marginalized & Learning how to Minister to LGBT+ People
A Workshop to Develop a Vision for AACF's Ministry toward LGBT+ People



3



EMPATHIZE


[Notes]
goal is to grow in your understanding of and empathy toward LGBT+ people
See how you are the same and different
Ultimately see beyond labels so that you can minister

Notes and questions



Share
What have your experiences been doing life with LGBT+ people among your friends and family?



10



Questions to Consider
What do you connect with, either because of your story or the story of LGBT+ people in your life?
How have they been negatively affected by society’s (including the Church’s) attitude toward LGBT+ people?
Ultimately, what do they need? What do they desire? What are they searching for?
What could the Church do differently?
How can we better reflect Christ’s love to LGBT+ people who aren't Christians?




[Notes]
watch each of 4 videos, discuss around questions, share my observations



Compelling Love Videos



Debra
DeSorrow
Cynthia & Marissa
Richard



Share
What do you connect with, either because of your story or the story of LGBT+ people in your life?
How have they been negatively affected by society’s (including the Church’s) attitude toward LGBT+ people?
Ultimately, what do they need? What do they desire? What are they searching for?
What could the Church do differently?
How can we better reflect Christ’s love to LGBT+ people who aren't Christians?



57

[Notes]
watch each of 4 videos, discuss around questions, share my observations



THINK


[Notes]
we act from what we believe
need a compassionate, consistent, theologically accurate foundation
so we can share winsomely
so that we can answer why questions
and so that we can cast vision for the Church



My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin.

Homosexual activity is a sin.

No promise of change in SSA.

We do not choose who we are attracted to but we choose how we respond.

[Notes]
to be transparent, provide words for those who believe similarly, and encourage to interact with ideas if beleive differently



My Beliefs



Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all.

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully.



My Beliefs



God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like.

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ.
59



Share
How do these align with your beliefs? Vanderbilt AACF’s beliefs? The beliefs of general members?



66



Why?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin

Marriage defined between man and women

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage

Written for a people in a time and place

[Notes]
As I mentioned earlier, we need to know why we believe what we believe
And others will want to know—we are a ”why” question generation



Why?



Created for perfect intimacy with God and the Body of Christ

Intimacy needs are good and normal

Neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meet intimacy needs

[Notes]
must look at this within greater context of how God created us for relationship and what he has to offer all people
But this will reveal why LGBT+ people don’t seem to be interested in what the Church has to offer and why many Christians are suffering

define intimacy needs

After the fall no perfect intimacy
if we don’t meet in healthy ways or will meet in unhealthy ways

so for the sexual minority, yes, you were created for intimacy, but no one is promised or needs sex or marriage to meet their intimacy needs

but we don’t know how to meet needs outside of marriage or sex
and straight people don’t do this, so why should sexual minorities?




Why?



The Blessing of Singleness (really)

Every person is first called to singleness

Singleness and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges

[Notes]
regardless of whether marriage later, all people should learn to do this well first

few churches teach these things
Church lift marriage on a pedestal and fail to provide support for single people to do singleness well

some of you are thinking “This is a nice idea, but I know that I am going to be married. Yeah, I want to be a good friend, but ultimately my spouse is going to be my number one and my family is going to be my first priority”
To you, I would ask how you know that you will be married?
Has God promised you this? Is that found anywhere in Scripture?
God wants to give us good things and the desire of our hearts
But aren’t there plenty of times when He doesn’t?
Well I really want to be a spouse and a parent
Do you not think that many people who are unmarried feel the same?
I can’t control my sexual urges, so I need to be married
Believe me, the people I know that feel they will be celibate for a lifetime have just as much problems with sexual urges as married people 

Is it not safer to assume the opposite?
to assume or plan for continuing in celibacy for a lifetime?
For a number of reasons
Let’s say you do end up getting married—wouldn’t learning to find companionship in friendship in the Body of Christ prepare you to have a healthier relationship with your spouse, be a better parent, and continue to be connected with the Body of Christ?
And if you never get married, wouldn’t it be better to start practicing healthy rhythms of singleness today instead of waiting, alone for marriage for a lifetime 

Others hear this and are struck with fear
Fear that they will be single for a lifetime
Fear that they will be alone for a lifetime
Fear that they will never have sex, be someone else’s special someone, or have children
And to you, I ask, how is this different that what an LGBT christian who seeks to steward their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic faces every day?

I know this is hard stuff to hear
it brings up anger and pain and fear
it would be reasonable to leave this conversation with despair




Why?



The Uniqueness of Christian Marriage

One man and one woman before God

Reflection of intimacy and complementarity in trinity

Centrality of child-rearing
Responsibility and commitment

[Notes]
many called out of singleness into marriage

it’s not that we’re saying we don’t want gay people to be happy
its just that Christian marriage has been uniquely reserved for a specific purpose

instead what we often hear in the church is that every has a right to be married and the purpose of marriage is to make you happy



Why?



All are called to steward sexuality in inconvenient ways

All can meet their intimacy needs in singleness

[Notes]
the invitation to those who experience same-sex attraction is no less good and the challenges are no more great



The Problem



Instead…

All are promised marriage 

We can’t meet our intimacy needs as single people 

Marriage is about being happy and we don’t need permission
74

[Notes]
so we shouldn’t be surprised that no one takes us seriously
that leaves us with a challenge as a church to foster a community where people can meet their intimacy needs as single people and teach accurately about marriage





Share



Have you seen this same hypocrisy in the Church?
Which of these concepts are hardest to put into practice?
What of this is reflected in the message and programming of Vanderbilt AACF?
81



The Solution



The Church needs to be a place where expectations are consistent and all people can meet their needs companionship in healthy ways.
We need to rediscover spiritual friendship in the Church, setting the Body of Christ as our first family.



The Solution



Spiritual Friendship—what does it look like?
Let ourselves need others and give others permission to ask of our time/energy/etc.
Don’t hide from others—be vulnerable and trust others
Expect to get hurt and commit to forgive
82



Share



Why don’t we build spiritual friendships? 
89

[Notes]
Afraid to be known and rejected
we know this would be painful
Cant trust others to love us like we perceive we love them
Dont want to need others or owe others anything
Want easy out of being able to blame and break commitment

without a Church that prioritizes and nurtures and facilitates and support intimate, spiritual friendship, it has died
and without a marriage commitment and without a Church that prioritizes, nurtures, facilitates, or supports, why would we take the risk of entering into this kind of spiritual friendship? 

we resolve that its safer to be alone than get hurt
the problem is that we still hurt if we are alone
and alone people get into all kinds of trouble
whether its sexual immorality outside of marriage
jumping into marriage for the wrong reasons
or finding that your spouse isn’t enough in marriage, leading to other forms of sexual immorality



The Solution



What does this look like practically?
Live together
Go on vacation together
Sacrifice money, time, location, job, and other friends for each other
Treat each other like chosen family

[Notes]
Committing ourselves to spiritual friendship
Biggest barriers are practical



The Solution



We’ve done this before, and you don’t have to wait for your church.

Being a Church that does spiritual friendship well is good for married people, straight single people, and LGBT+ people.
91

[Notes]
I want you to know that there is hope
we, as Christians, have done this before
its written on our hearts, to live in community in the Body of Christ and enjoy spiritual friendship with each other
and you dont have to wait for your church to make these changes
you can do this in your community of believers today and begin enjoying its blessings
(many of you are already doing this)

We can be a Church where we can all find intimate, meaningful companionship in friendship in the Body of Christ
its good for married people because instead of struggling to meet their intimacy needs in God and their spouse alone, they will have relationship and support from the Body of Christ
its good for straight people who will continue singleness for a lifetime because they can find companionship in the Body of Christ
and its good for LGBT people, whether they continue in singleness for a lifetime or marry someone of the opposite sex, they have a place in a Church that does spiritual friendship well




Share



What could this look like in your relationships?
How could this shape the message and programming of Vanderbilt AACF?
How can you prepare each other to do this well after college?
98



NEXT


[Notes]
HW



Training Objectives
Growing in Empathy for LGBT+ People & Exploring Biblical Sexuality
Developing a Posture toward the Marginalized & Learning how to Minister to LGBT+ People
A Workshop to Develop a Vision for AACF's Ministry toward LGBT+ People






SURVEY

