Christian communities must become places of thriving


[Notes]
So we’ve covered the 10 most convincing arguments for a revisionist sexual ethic
I’ve modeled responding winsomely
And, we’ve pointed out that better arguments alone aren’t enough
I’ve pointed out that churches must do what it takes to help gay Christians stewarding their sexualities according to a historic sexual ethic actually thrive
Our Christian communities have got to become places where, with reasonable effort, gay Christians bear good fruit from a traditional sexual ethic


2
THRIVING COMMUNITIES
Share publicly and clearly about God’s love and wisdom for gay people
Christian leaders minister to gay people with compassion and theological accuracy
Protect kids from the wounds of the closet by sharing God’s love and wisdom before puberty
Help everyone thrive according to God’s good and weighty wisdom
Offer lifelong, lived-in family to those called to vocational singleness

[Notes]
How?

First, many churches are already striving to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people in honest and empathetic ways.
With compassion and theological accuracy, they’re exploring the complex questions about faith and LGBT+ topics,
like whether God intended for people to experience same-sex attraction,
how God could be good if He usually chooses not to change people’s sexual orientations,
how God invites gay Christians to steward their sexualities,
how God invites gay people to meet their needs for connection and community in healthy ways,
and how friends and family can come around gay people in their lives.
As a result, straight people in these churches are learning how to love gay people well and reflect the love of Christ in conversations about sexuality.
Plus, gay people in these churches who haven’t shared their story yet know what their churches believe and whether it’s safe to share their story.

Second, many churches are equipping pastors and lay leaders to offer compassionate and theologically accurate one-on-one care to gay people.
They’re doing what it takes to gain the competency to provide pastoral care to gay people.
While licensed counselors still may be included to help address clinical levels of anxiety or depression,
these churches are recognizing that same-sex attractions are not a mental illness to be cured.
Parents and pastors are learning to help gay people integrate their faith and sexuality
in ways that lead to thriving in this life and deep relationships with God and friends.

That’s a great start

But gay Christians committed to a historic sexual ethic are still struggling in most of those churches.
Why?
Their churches are missing three key levers
They’re failing to protect kids from the wounds of the closet
They’re hesitating to raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship
And they’re struggling to offer lifelong, lived-in family to those in vocational singleness

So to become communities of thriving for gay people, they’ve got to protect kids from the wounds of the closet
Gay teens spend an average of five years in the closet, making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents
—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture.
This leads to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.
Gay teens are 5 times more likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers,
and 54% of gay people have left the church.
The wounds of the closet become the greatest barrier to gay Christians thriving according to a historic sexual ethic,
haunting them for a lifetime.
If we wait for kids to come out to us to share about God’s love and wisdom for gay people, it will be too late

Instead, churches must equip parents to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation
about God’s wisdom for everyone’s sexual stewardship *before puberty*,
demonstrating safety and inviting children to share early about their sexuality.
If teens hear before puberty that gay people don’t choose who they are attracted to,
that they have nothing to be ashamed about, that we won’t try to fix them, that we don’t love them any less,
and that God has good and beautiful plans for them.
Then hopefully when some teens realize they experience same-sex attractions,
They’ll quickly share with their parents and pastors,
inviting them to help them learn how to steward their sexuality in God-honoring ways
and preventing the wounds of the closet from ever being inflicted.

Second key lever: to become communities of thriving for gay people, churches must raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship
As we’ve already mentioned, Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy, and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.
But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.
Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, churches can invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.
This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance, having sex outside of marriage,
making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography, failing to consider a call to vocational singleness,
unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage, or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.
But again, not to make life more difficult for straight people, but to help everyone flourish according to God’s wisdom
and experience less internal resistance and external barriers to thriving because we’re all doing it together

And the third and final key lever: to become communities of thriving for gay people, churches must offer lifelong, lived-in family to those in vocational singleness
Few churches are places where anyone can thrive in lifetime singleness for the sake of the kingdom, regardless of sexual orientation.
Christian leaders don’t teach vocational singleness, teens don’t see vocational singleness modeled or celebrated,
and vocational singles feel alone as roommate after roommate moves out
—starved of a consistent experience of family in the body of Christ.

Instead, our churches can teach what the Bible has to say about vocational singleness,
guide teens and young adults to discern whether they are called to vocational singleness or Christian marriage,
hire vocationally single leaders and pastors,
and celebrate the callings of those called to vocational singleness.
Moreover, churches can ensure that vocational singles enjoy lifelong, lived-in family in the body of Christ
by helping vocational singles start intentional Christian communities
by suggesting the idea, helping them cast vision for it,
providing pastoral support while they explore the possibility, coaching them through the process,
and even providing financial support in the early years.

In short, while the best arguments for revisionist sexual ethics aren’t convincing,
While they’re easy to dismiss,
If you want gay people to actually embrace God’s wisdom and thrive according to that wisdom,
with reasonable effort,
Then your churches are going to have to take these five steps to become communities of thriving!

Thank you so much for your time!
We’re now going to move to Q&A
But before we do that, let me turn off the recording…










