


LOVING

LGBT+ PEOPLE




[Notes]
Need
challenge



Our Mission
To equip the Church with the understanding and skills to better love and serve those who experience same-sex attraction




[Notes]
Terms

solution



Our Stats
4 Churches + 2 Universities
500 Christian Leaders for 1330 hours of training
92% feel better prepared to minister to sexual minorities
94% found training to be effective or very effective
99% feel more ready to be a friend to sexual minorities






Our Vision
We want the Church we leave our children to be one where boys and girls grow up hearing their parents, friends, and pastors talk about sexuality in compassionate and meaningful ways . And if those boys and girls find themselves attracted to other boys or girls of the same sex, we want them to be able to share with their parents, friends, or pastors without fear or shame.




[Notes]
our vision
why this matters to me



Share
What have your experiences been doing life with LGBT+ people among your friends and family?



8



Conversation Goal
Explore theology of sexuality and intimacy and practical steps to building meaningful community




How we used to do it.






Behave
Believe
Belong

[Notes]
framework


A better strategy.



Believe
Belong
Become




[Notes]
BELONG – LGBT+ people can find acceptance and unconditional love, talk about their experiences without shame, find meaningful, intimate community
BELIEVE – offer complex and winsome theology of sexuality, walk alongside people as they come to believe what is true
BEOMCE – compassionately and effectively minister to LGBT+ persons as they become who Christ has called them to be



A better strategy.



Belong

Believe


[Notes]
Explore biblical sexuality and practical steps to building meaningful community



THINK


[Notes]
Why explore theology?
we act from what we believe
need a compassionate, consistent, theologically accurate foundation
so we can share winsomely
so that we can answer why questions
and so that we can cast vision for the Church



My Beliefs



Experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin.

Same-sex romantic and sexual activity are sins.

No promise of change in SSA.

We do not choose who we are attracted to but we choose how we respond.

[Notes]
to be transparent, provide words for those who believe similarly, and encourage to interact with ideas if believe differently

Personal experience
Psychology
Bible
Tradition
Orthodox theologians
Apostolic sucession



My Beliefs



Any sin can separate us from God, but Jesus offers salvation to all.

God promises transformation of the heart and provision of fullness to anyone who seeks Him faithfully.



My Beliefs



God calls the Church to love those who experience SSA regardless of what their journeys look like.

God loves LGBT+ people and He values the gifts, talents, and fellowship they can offer the Body of Christ.
14



Share
How do these align with your beliefs?



19

[Notes]
Talk briefly about alternative perspectives



Why?



Preponderance of Biblical support

Same-sex sexual activity is sin

Marriage defined between man and women

Context of rape, incest, adultery, or sex outside of marriage

Written for a people in a time and place

[Notes]
As I mentioned earlier, we need to know why we believe what we believe
And others will want to know—we are a ”why” question generation



Why?



Created for perfect intimacy with God and the Body of Christ

Intimacy needs are good and normal

Neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meet intimacy needs

[Notes]
must look at this within greater context of how God created us for relationship and what he has to offer all people
But this will reveal why LGBT+ people don’t seem to be interested in what the Church has to offer and why many Christians are suffering

define intimacy needs

After the fall no perfect intimacy
if we don’t meet in healthy ways or will meet in unhealthy ways

so for the sexual minority, yes, you were created for intimacy, but no one is promised or needs sex or marriage to meet their intimacy needs

but we don’t know how to meet needs outside of marriage or sex
and straight people don’t do this, so why should sexual minorities?




Why?



The Blessing of Singleness (really)

Every person is first called to singleness

Singleness and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges

[Notes]
regardless of whether marriage later, all people should learn to do this well first

few churches teach these things
Church lift marriage on a pedestal and fail to provide support for single people to do singleness well

some of you are thinking “This is a nice idea, but I know that I am going to be married. Yeah, I want to be a good friend, but ultimately my spouse is going to be my number one and my family is going to be my first priority”
To you, I would ask how you know that you will be married?
Has God promised you this? Is that found anywhere in Scripture?
God wants to give us good things and the desire of our hearts
But aren’t there plenty of times when He doesn’t?
Well I really want to be a spouse and a parent
Do you not think that many people who are unmarried feel the same?
I can’t control my sexual urges, so I need to be married
Believe me, the people I know that feel they will be celibate for a lifetime have just as much problems with sexual urges as married people 

Is it not safer to assume the opposite?
to assume or plan for continuing in celibacy for a lifetime?
For a number of reasons
Let’s say you do end up getting married—wouldn’t learning to find companionship in friendship in the Body of Christ prepare you to have a healthier relationship with your spouse, be a better parent, and continue to be connected with the Body of Christ?
And if you never get married, wouldn’t it be better to start practicing healthy rhythms of singleness today instead of waiting, alone for marriage for a lifetime 

Others hear this and are struck with fear
Fear that they will be single for a lifetime
Fear that they will be alone for a lifetime
Fear that they will never have sex, be someone else’s special someone, or have children
And to you, I ask, how is this different that what an LGBT christian who seeks to steward their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic faces every day?

I know this is hard stuff to hear
it brings up anger and pain and fear
it would be reasonable to leave this conversation with despair




Why?



The Uniqueness of Christian Marriage

One man and one woman before God

Reflection of intimacy and complementarity in trinity

Centrality of child-rearing
Responsibility and commitment
37

[Notes]
many called out of singleness into marriage

it’s not that we’re saying we don’t want gay people to be happy
its just that Christian marriage has been uniquely reserved for a specific purpose

instead what we often hear in the church is that every has a right to be married and the purpose of marriage is to make you happy



Share



Which of these concepts are hardest to put into practice?
42



Why?



All are called to steward sexuality in inconvenient ways

All can meet their intimacy needs in singleness

[Notes]
the invitation to those who experience same-sex attraction is no less good and the challenges are no more great



The Problem



Instead…

All are promised marriage 

We can’t meet our intimacy needs as single people 

Marriage is about being happy and we don’t need permission
44

[Notes]
so we shouldn’t be surprised that no one takes us seriously
that leaves us with a challenge as a church to foster a community where people can meet their intimacy needs as single people and teach accurately about marriage





Share



Have you seen this same hypocrisy in the Church?
49
