


LOVING

LGBT+ PEOPLE




[Notes]
Need
challenge



Conversation Goal
Explore theology of sexuality and intimacy and practical steps to building meaningful community




How we used to do it.






Behave
Believe
Belong

[Notes]
framework


A better strategy.



Believe
Belong
Become




[Notes]
BELONG – LGBT+ people can find acceptance and unconditional love, talk about their experiences without shame, find meaningful, intimate community
BELIEVE – offer complex and winsome theology of sexuality, walk alongside people as they come to believe what is true
BEOMCE – compassionately and effectively minister to LGBT+ persons as they become who Christ has called them to be



A better strategy.



Belong

Believe


[Notes]
Explore biblical sexuality and practical steps to building meaningful community



THINK


[Notes]
Why explore theology?
we act from what we believe
need a compassionate, consistent, theologically accurate foundation
so we can share winsomely
so that we can answer why questions
and so that we can cast vision for the Church



Why?



Created for perfect intimacy with God and the Body of Christ

Intimacy needs are good and normal

Neither sex nor marriage are promised or necessary to meet intimacy needs

[Notes]
must look at this within greater context of how God created us for relationship and what he has to offer all people
But this will reveal why LGBT+ people don’t seem to be interested in what the Church has to offer and why many Christians are suffering

define intimacy needs

After the fall no perfect intimacy
if we don’t meet in healthy ways or will meet in unhealthy ways

so for the sexual minority, yes, you were created for intimacy, but no one is promised or needs sex or marriage to meet their intimacy needs

but we don’t know how to meet needs outside of marriage or sex
and straight people don’t do this, so why should sexual minorities?




Why?



The Blessing of Singleness (really)

Every person is first called to singleness

Singleness and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges

[Notes]
regardless of whether marriage later, all people should learn to do this well first

few churches teach these things
Church lift marriage on a pedestal and fail to provide support for single people to do singleness well

some of you are thinking “This is a nice idea, but I know that I am going to be married. Yeah, I want to be a good friend, but ultimately my spouse is going to be my number one and my family is going to be my first priority”
To you, I would ask how you know that you will be married?
Has God promised you this? Is that found anywhere in Scripture?
God wants to give us good things and the desire of our hearts
But aren’t there plenty of times when He doesn’t?
Well I really want to be a spouse and a parent
Do you not think that many people who are unmarried feel the same?
I can’t control my sexual urges, so I need to be married
Believe me, the people I know that feel they will be celibate for a lifetime have just as much problems with sexual urges as married people 

Is it not safer to assume the opposite?
to assume or plan for continuing in celibacy for a lifetime?
For a number of reasons
Let’s say you do end up getting married—wouldn’t learning to find companionship in friendship in the Body of Christ prepare you to have a healthier relationship with your spouse, be a better parent, and continue to be connected with the Body of Christ?
And if you never get married, wouldn’t it be better to start practicing healthy rhythms of singleness today instead of waiting, alone for marriage for a lifetime 

Others hear this and are struck with fear
Fear that they will be single for a lifetime
Fear that they will be alone for a lifetime
Fear that they will never have sex, be someone else’s special someone, or have children
And to you, I ask, how is this different that what an LGBT christian who seeks to steward their sexuality according to a traditional sexual ethic faces every day?

I know this is hard stuff to hear
it brings up anger and pain and fear
it would be reasonable to leave this conversation with despair




Why?



The Uniqueness of Christian Marriage

One man and one woman before God

Reflection of intimacy and complementarity in trinity

Centrality of child-rearing
Responsibility and commitment

[Notes]
many called out of singleness into marriage

it’s not that we’re saying we don’t want gay people to be happy
its just that Christian marriage has been uniquely reserved for a specific purpose

instead what we often hear in the church is that every has a right to be married and the purpose of marriage is to make you happy



Share



Which of these concepts are hardest to put into practice?



Why?



All are called to steward sexuality in inconvenient ways

All can meet their intimacy needs in singleness

[Notes]
the invitation to those who experience same-sex attraction is no less good and the challenges are no more great



The Problem



Instead…

All are promised marriage 

We can’t meet our intimacy needs as single people 

Marriage is about being happy and we don’t need permission

[Notes]
so we shouldn’t be surprised that no one takes us seriously
that leaves us with a challenge as a church to foster a community where people can meet their intimacy needs as single people and teach accurately about marriage





Share



Have you seen this same hypocrisy in the Church?



The Solution



The Church needs to be a place where expectations are consistent and all people can meet their needs for companionship in healthy ways.
We need to rediscover spiritual friendship in the Church, setting the Body of Christ as our first family.



BUILD


[Notes]
So practically, how do we build meaningful community?
What does this solution look like?



Activity



Spend 5 minutes listing your physical, spiritual, and mental/emotional intimacy needs.



Share



Are all of these needs likely to be met in God alone? God plus a spouse alone?

[Notes]
Point out that we all need meaningful, spiritual friendship in addition to a relationship with God, regardless of whether we are married



The Solution



Spiritual Friendship—what does it look like?
Let ourselves need others and give others permission to ask of our time/energy/etc.
Don’t hide from others—be vulnerable and trust others
Expect to get hurt and commit to forgive

[Notes]
Chosen family, spiritual kinship



Share



Why don’t we build spiritual friendships?
Afraid of being known and rejected
Can’t trust others to love us as well as we love them
Don’t want to need others or owe others anything
Want an easy out, to blame and break commitment




Share



What practical barriers are there?
People live alone and far away
We want the freedom to change friends, churches, and cities

[Notes]
without a Church that prioritizes and nurtures and facilitates and support intimate, spiritual friendship, it has died
and without a marriage commitment and without a Church that prioritizes, nurtures, facilitates, or supports, why would we take the risk of entering into this kind of spiritual friendship? 

we resolve that its safer to be alone than get hurt
the problem is that we still hurt if we are alone
and alone people get into all kinds of trouble
whether its sexual immorality outside of marriage
jumping into marriage for the wrong reasons
or finding that your spouse isn’t enough in marriage, leading to other forms of sexual immorality



The Solution



What does this look like practically?
Live together
Go on vacation together
Sacrifice money, time, location, job, and other friends for each other
Treat each other like chosen family

[Notes]
Committing ourselves to spiritual friendship



The Solution



We’ve done this before, and you don’t have to wait for your church.

Being a Church that does spiritual friendship well is good for married people, straight single people, and LGBT+ people.

[Notes]
I want you to know that there is hope
we, as Christians, have done this before
its written on our hearts, to live in community in the Body of Christ and enjoy spiritual friendship with each other
and you dont have to wait for your church to make these changes
you can do this in your community of believers today and begin enjoying its blessings
(many of you are already doing this)

We can be a Church where we can all find intimate, meaningful companionship in friendship in the Body of Christ
its good for married people because instead of struggling to meet their intimacy needs in God and their spouse alone, they will have relationship and support from the Body of Christ
its good for straight people who will continue singleness for a lifetime because they can find companionship in the Body of Christ
and its good for LGBT people, whether they continue in singleness for a lifetime or marry someone of the opposite sex, they have a place in a Church that does spiritual friendship well




Share



What could this look like in your relationships?
