God’s Love& Wisdom for Trans People

[Notes]
PIETER

I’m honored to get to spend more time with all of you

Today I’m joined by my friend Kat LaPrairie
And together, we want to take a next step in equipping you to disciple those in your care
as Willow steps further into public conversation about God’s love and wisdom for LGBT+ people

Last time we were together, we noted that separate time and space was needed to focus on ministering to trans people and loved ones

Because empathetic and effective ministry to trans people is built on a whole different set of theological questions than ministry to gay people
God’s Love & Wisdom
Foundational concepts and terms
Care around suicidality
Gender ethics and theological questions
Practical tools in pastoral care

[Notes]
PIETER

Well, today is that day!
In particular we’re going to 

First, Build out a foundational understanding of terminology and concepts for this conversation

Then, We’ll recognize the high rates of depression and suicidality among trans people and how we must lead with compassionate care

Next we’ll explore gender ethics and Christ’s love and wisdom for trans people

And then we’ll wrap up our time together by focusing on some practical tools for pastoral care
God’s Love & Wisdom
Kat and Pieter will share their convictions and how that informs their recommendations for pastoral care.

Willow is still discerning their convictions.

[Notes]
PIETER

Now you might be wondering what Willow’s convictions about trans topics are and why my friend Kat is here

As you know, Willow is still discerning what theological guidance yall will offer to trans people and parents and loved ones. Kat and I have been involved in that process, including sharing how God has led us to make sense of gender ethics.

Kat and I will share today from our convictions about Christ’s love and wisdom for trans people.

But we want to be clear: We’re not going to try to attempt to convince you of this, per se.

And while Willow may arrive at something similar to what Kat and I share, your church is still discerning.
Second, why is Kat here?

Well, this isn’t just theoretical for Kat. Making sense of gender incongruence and discerning God’s wisdom for trans people has been a big part of her journey. She’s passionate about people, the church, and sharing the gospel.

She’s spoken at multiple conferences, shared her story on various podcasts, and been involved in big projects seeking to resources parents and Christian leaders. She lives and works in Grand Rapids while serving and teaching in her local church.
But she can tell it much better than me.
So let’s welcome Kat and prepare our hearts to listen and learn.
kat’sstory

[Notes]
KAT

Hi everyone, I am so excited and honored to be here with you all today to discuss this light topic of gender!

This is such a loaded topic and is complex and nuanced. So it’s ok to feel a bit intimidated and overwhelmed. However, I hope this will just be a fun time to get to know each other better. 

With that said, let’s dive in! Let’s talk about ministering to trans people.

I often talk to Christians who still find the conversation about trans people and gender and biological sex confusing. What do these different categories even mean? If you’ve only ever experienced feeling at home in your own body, then it totally makes sense to me that it’d be difficult to imagine something else.

But maybe my story can help.

I first started noticing gender incongruence in my life when I was 4 years old, but when we had to split into separate boys and girls small groups in middle school, that sense of disconnection became painfully unavoidable. In the girls' small group, our leader walked us through some femininity topics; how to be Godly women, and how to honor God with our femininity. We didn’t pull apart how God defines femininity vs. how the World defines it. We overlaid the two on top of each other, assuming that was everyone’s experience. 

I remember looking down at my basketball shorts and skinned knees. I didn’t look or feel feminine according to the culture. So I started to question if I might be dishonoring God. I felt like I didn’t measure up, because I didn’t see other people like me. It seemed that God had a type, and I wasn’t it. I remember thinking, I’m not feminine enough for God. Maybe I don’t belong here. Maybe it’d be better for everyone if I just left.

In High School and College things got tougher. In addition to all of the gender stuff, I discovered I was attracted to other women. I was trying to navigate dating. I was trying to navigate relationships and I had all this stuff inside me that I didn’t know how to describe or put words to. I felt stuck. I wanted to scream, but felt if I did nobody would hear me. I felt like I was going to implode. I had to do something to relieve the pressure. So I began to date, and ultimately left the church.

I felt misunderstood. There wasn’t a way that I had to describe to others what was happening internally and to also put them at ease that I wasn’t someone to be feared. 
But God had a different plan. Over the next 10 years he tugged on my heart and pursued me. 10 years later, I walked back into a church. I’ll share more of that journey later.

Concepts/Terminology
Sex—physical body; being male or female as defined by chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics

Gender—internal sense of being a woman or a man; influenced by cultural gender roles/expectations; named/labeled internally and externally as gender identity

[Notes]
KAT

What I hope you notice is that at a young age, I started experiencing this painful incongruence between my biological sex and how I perceived myself internally.

By biological sex, I mean my physical body. My chromosomes, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics all pointed to the fact that I was a female.

But internally, my gender felt like it didn’t match. I didn’t feel feminine on the inside, I didn’t feel fully like a woman. 

The internal sense of whether a person feels like a man or a woman is part of a person’s gender. Our perception of whether we feel man or woman enough can be impacted by stereotypes and expectations from the world around us. Additionally, a person may privately and/or publicly label their gender, and that’s what’s called a person’s gender identity.

I know this is getting complicated, but you can find a full glossary of terms in your handout.


Concepts/Terminology
Sex: female or male, physical body
Gender: woman (feminine) or man (masculine)

Gender Incongruence – acute sense that one's gender does not correspond with the experience typically associated with the person's biological sex

Transgender/Trans – a general term for someone who experiences gender incongruence

[Notes]
KAT

So, a person’s biological sex is either male or female, and that’s based on their physical body.

And a person’s gender is either a man or a woman, and that’s based on whether they feel feminine or masculine internally.

A female typically feels like a woman, feels sufficiently feminine on the inside. And a male typically feels like a man, feels sufficiently masculine on the inside.

But what happens when a person doesn’t feel like their biological sex and internal sense of gender line up, like when those didn’t line up for me? We’ll call that gender incongruence.

And then some people use the word transgender or trans to describe a person who experiences gender incongruence. Kind of like how we use the word gay or lesbian to describe a person who experiences same-sex attraction.

We’ll talk a whole lot more about pronouns and names and labels later, but in short, I have found the term transgender to be helpful when articulating my experience. The definition of trans that I found was: an umbrella term used to describe the disconnection a person feels from their biological sex and perceived sense of self. There are two aspects to this definition that were relieving and helpful
I finally had language to articulate an experience I had felt as young as 4 yrs. old to others. 
The word umbrella offered a freedom for me to define what I meant by trans. 

I had felt pressure “If I use the word trans, does that mean that I have to change my name or pronouns? Does that mean I have to transition?” 

No, it can just mean that I experience incongruence with gender and biology. 

So I make it a habit to tell others what I mean by trans. I want people to know my story and notice how I’m showing up in the world with Jesus. 


preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

Okay, so now that we’ve synced on some shared terminology for this conversation,
I want to recognize a painful but important reality when it comes to caring for trans people.

Different estimates put the number of trans people at anywhere from .5% to 5% of the population
And experience among trans people are varied

For example, trans people may be straight, gay, bisexual, asexual, or something in between polysexual, pansexual, etc.
According to a survey conducted by the National LGBTQ Task force and the National Center for Transgender Equality,
about 3/4 of trans people are attracted to people of the same biological sex

When you’ve met one trans person, you’ve met one trans person

But one aspect that’s painfully common is depression and suicidality

41% of trans people attempt suicide (1.6% in gen pop)

Even higher rates for those who…
lost a job due to bias (55%),
were harassed/bullied in school (51%)
had low household income (61%),
were the victim of physical assault (61%), or
were the victim of sexual assault (65%)
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

41% of trans people attempt suicide, as compared to 1.6% of the general population.
Trans suicide rates rose even higher for those who
lost a job due to bias (55%),
were harassed/bullied in school (51%),
had low household income (61%),
were the victim of physical assault (61%), or
were the victim of sexual assault (65%).


Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of (compared to the general population): 
borderline personality disorder
schizophrenia 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
autism spectrum disorder
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

Trans people are generally at greater risk of mental illness, experiencing higher rates of
borderline personality disorder,
schizophrenia,
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD),
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
and autism spectrum disorder
compared to the general population.

Trans people were made in the image of God. He highly values them. Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their lives aren’t worth living.

Neither “Just be normal” nor “Transition or suicide” fully reflects God’s love and wisdom.
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

We can see from these statistics that more than any other people group,
trans people experience an excess of mental health and suicide concerns.

Trans people are made in the image of God and God highly values them.
Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their precious life isn't worth living.
This piece of the trans* experience can often be ignored
or used as the explanation behind why an individual is experiencing gender incongruence.

Neither provides holistic care for the individual.
Different extremes in the debate about gender incongruence offer trans* people equally unhelpful advice:
One side yells, “Just be normal!”
They ignore the reality that trans* people did not choose to experience gender incongruence and that there is no proven combination of counseling or spiritual practices to eliminate gender incongruence. Those on this extreme minimize the daily, painful reality of navigating enduring gender incongruence. They seem to forget that trans* people are also made in the image of God, are greatly valued by Him, and that Christians should greatly value trans* people as well.
Then the other side yells, “Transition or suicide!”
They suggest that transition is an effective intervention to address mental illness (including suicidality) and that those who hesitate to bless hormonal and surgical transition are increasing suicidality.
That’s heavy
And that’s the reality of some of the pastoral care spaces where you’re already operating

Before we tease out the science behind that “transition or suicide” line, Kat, I’m curious how you’ve seen this statistic play out in the lives of trans people you’ve walked alongside?


Trans people were made in the image of God. He highly values them. Yet the brokenness of this world has cruelly convinced many trans people that they aren't worth loving and that their lives aren’t worth living.

Neither “Just be normal” nor “Transition or suicide” fully reflects God’s love and wisdom.
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
KAT

The depression and sheer pain, as a result of gender incongruence in some of my dear friends, has been sobering, heavy, and deeply painful. As I have been invited into others lives I have been privileged and heartbroken to see the degree of pain others are living in. I have seen the ways that it can be debilitating.

Anxiety, stress, mood changes, loss of interest in once desired activities, isolation, loneliness (you ever just see someone who feels so alone? They feel it so strongly that there are not enough words in the world to convince them otherwise?) and ultimately depression. I saw the powerlessness. 

It is heavy. The reality that some people's distress can be so strong and lead them to feel so hopeless that they feel their only way out is to die. I have had to ask other resources about how to do this well. Discerning when to reach out and involve other professionals is crucial. We need to have an understanding of when we are in over our head. 

The other side is loud too. Transition!

When I was 28 I was seeing a secular counselor to unpack this gender incongruence thing. I described my experience and the distress. My hope was that we would unpack more of this desire I had to be the opposite sex. But to my surprise her response was “Let me know when you are ready to transition and I will connect you to the right people.”

I felt like a problem to be fixed and not a person to be known. The bottom line is I think the Transition or Suicide mantra is over simplified. There are deep emotional longings underneath.
 
The reality is, some people’s distress can be intense and debilitating, so much so they feel their only option is to die. I have had to ask others for resources in walking alongside others well. We need to know when we are in over our head and outsource. 

But I have seen firsthand that when people have Jesus, a community of believers, and a good mental health counselor, they can lead thriving lives. 



Available research does not demonstrate that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk.
So if transition isn’t the solution to trans suicide, what is?
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

I can speak to the science a little and to what the most effective care for depression and suicide is. 
Long story short:
No, available research doesn’t show that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduces suicide risk. 
Some scientific research demonstrated that using gender-affirming hormones or puberty blockers was associated with a lower risk of suicidal ideation. Yet different analysis of the same data found that males going through hormonal transition were more likely to plan suicide, to attempt suicide, and to require hospitalization for a suicide attempt.

Similar analysis found that 16- and 17-year-olds who received cross-sex hormones were more than twice as likely to report a past-year suicide attempt requiring inpatient hospitalization. I’ll make sure to include the references to all of this in followup notes we’ll add to the staff resource folder.
A similar story emerges for surgical transition.
Scientific studies have consistently found that surgical transition effectively reduces gender dysphoria and leads to high patient satisfaction, but they fail to reduce depression and suicidality. A longitudinal study of surgical transition in Denmark found that while 21.2% of participants experienced a reduction in suicidality after transition, 15.4% of participants experienced an increase in suicidality after transition.
Available research does not demonstrate that hormonal or surgical transition effectively reduce suicide risk.

Yall might have seen the news earlier this week that the largest review ever undertaken in the field of transgender health was released. It was led by Dr. Hilary Cass, a former president of the UK’s Royal College of Paediatrics, and it was commissioned by Britain’s National Health Service (NHS). It confirmed that
80% of gender incongruence resolves by adulthood
Puberty blockers are usually a gateway to cross-sex hormone therapy
Puberty blockers + hormone therapy aren't effective treatment for depression/suicidality and may be harmful
Talk therapy around co-occurring mental health concerns most effective treatment for depression/suicidality
Trans identification growth isn't explained by greater social acceptance and correlated factors include females, social media use, and friendship with other trans females

We’ll unpack more of that later, but it suffices to say that transition isn’t the solution to trans suicide.

So if it isn’t, what is?


The best practices for caring for depression and suicidality are universal:
In-person talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Use of antidepressants
A broader community of social support
Preventing suicide

[Notes]
PIETER

The best way to reduce depression and suicidality for a trans person
is to employ the best practice for reducing depression and suicidality among anyone:
1. In-person talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
2. Regular exercise/physical activity
3. Use of antidepressants
4. A broader community of social support
If a trans person you’re supporting is struggling with suicidality, help them find a therapist or counselor, go with them on walks, and help them maintain and deepen connections with safe friends and family.
Okay, so we’ve built out a foundational understanding of terminology and concepts for this conversation
And we’ve recognized the high rates of depression and suicidality among trans people and how we must lead with compassionate care
Next, let’s explore gender ethics and what Christ’s love and wisdom is for trans people.

To get into that, Kat, I was hoping you could share with us some of your own journey of discovering God’s wisdom for you.

“God drew near”

[Notes]
KAT

As I mentioned earlier, around the same time that I left the church, I was also starting to come to terms with the fact that I was trans. The legalism of the church spaces I grew up in left me feeling like God didn’t care about the way I felt, and if He didn’t care about this part of me…then I wasn’t interested in submitting to what He had to say. So I left. I set out to find ways to fulfill my heart needs the best way I knew how. 
During my 10 year stint away from the church, I started seeing a counselor and wanted to figure out what to do with my gender incongruence. I wanted to decide once and for all if I would transition to male or find some really amazing coping mechanisms to stick with my biological sex. I started consuming a lot of YouTube. I would watch social media influencers documenting their transitions to the opposite sex. I kind of became obsessed. 

The results and effects were certainly appealing. I mean to be able to have something I never thought was possible…? Yeah, that was more than appealing. 

But there were drawbacks too. There would be a lot of things that I would have to deal with, continually:
Weekly shots of testosterone that I would have to administer myself. 
Going through another puberty.
Still having to feel uncomfortable in public restrooms

The desire to live my life Stealth. Meaning without detection. I did not want to be out or seen as a Trans Man, I just wanted to be a man. But how would that go at the club or trying to find a woman to date, settle down with? 

What about the first 28 years of my life? If I lived Stealth there would be no story telling of my collegiate basketball days, or showing my baby pictures, what a shame…I was a cute kid. 

Not to mention, how would my family react to all this? Would they accept me as another son, I have two brothers already. 

It was all really overwhelming. But I was gearing up for it. Facing the side-effects or what came with the reality that I so desperately wanted. 

But I started to wonder if I was just going to be trading one set of problems for another (potentially) bigger set of problems. 

Simultaneously, God was moving and working in my life. I was disenchanted with how life was for myself. I had this girlfriend of 3.5 years and I wasn’t super happy. But yet I felt the pressure of the culture and my upbringing to settle down and get married. Commit. 

I started to envision what I wanted my life to look like, married. And to my surprise I saw church as a part of that vision. So we started going back to church.

During this time when I was curious about church and God again but still considering transition and still dating my girlfriend, I remember exploring all the different ways non-Christians and Christians seem to make sense of trans stuff. 

There were some non-Christians who seemed to actually be in favor of a strict gender binary. But in contrast to conservative voices, they believed their gender reflected who they really were and their physical body should be adjusted to match.

This is kind of where I found myself. But at the same time, this also felt like it kind of deepened the gender stereotypes that created a lot of my distress in the first place.

Then there were other non-Christians who seemed to argue that we need to get rid of the male/female or man/woman distinction altogether. That we should get rid of those labels because they’re all on a spectrum anyway. 

But that explanation seems to invalidate my feelings that I wanted to be a man. This was confusing, because the Secular solutions seemed to be at odds and contradictory.

One seeking to maintain the gender/sex binary while the other sought to deconstruct it.

As I got closer to God, I ran across some Christians who were embracing some of these Secular philosophies. Pointing to an idea that the Bible was outdated, so Christians can choose to follow whatever gender ethic they feel is most fair and true.

And then on the other extreme there were Christians from my childhood who said lesbians and trans people were abominations, simple as that.

All of this was confusing, but in the midst of it, God revealed Himself to me. The Powerful and tender God. He was bigger than all of this chaos I had swirling around in my head.
 
He drew near to me. In that drawing I began to care what He thought. What He thought of me, my gender identity, sexuality, everything. 

So after a while I found a smaller church, God led someone to me. She and I walked together, searching to discover answers to some of my big questions. “What did God think of me? Could I get married to the same-sex? Could I have a family the way I envisioned? Was He disgusted? Was I a mistake?” To my surprise and joy, I discovered that I was not a mistake and that He took great delight in me. 

As we walked together, I feel like I got a glimpse as to how BIG the God of the universe is. My mentor did not know the ins and outs of the trans conversation. But she did not back away. He is above ALL. He is bigger than the chaos you may have swirling in your head around this topic, as you sit across from another person wrestling. 

When we started looking at who Jesus was, how in love with me He was/is, and how POWERFUL that love is… I was undone. I realized that God hadn't forsaken me because of my sexuality or gender incongruence. God wasn't saying I had to be lonely for a lifetime. He just wanted to show me how good His original designs for me and Christian family were.

Sexuality and Gender, especially for me are interwoven experiences. So we were discovering and exploring the sexual ethic. But in addition we also did a book study. A book by Dr. Larry Crabb, Fully Alive: A Biblical Vision of Gender That Frees Men and Women to Live Beyond Stereotypes. 

The exploratory question for this book was: What did God intend when He created gender? 

The book explored the gender boundaries for men and women. How and what the intentions are as we embody both masculine and feminine aspects of our Creator. The book wasn’t from or for a trans lens. 

The book didn’t talk about attire or the physical presentation of men and women. Rather, it focused on the uniquenesses of masculinity and femininity. That we as sexed beings embody masculinity and femininity inherently. Meaning, the fact that I am physiologically a female and a woman, I reflect feminine characteristics inherently. Men, same thing. A physiological make up of a male means they are a man and reflect masculinity. 

All of this to say, when I looked at scripture and Dr. Crabb’s work on this topic, I found that the boundaries were broad for men and women. 

When I learned that maybe God was not requiring me to dress or present like “all” females, but that there are intrinsic ways in which I embody femininity, I got excited. Maybe God has a purpose for my gender incongruence! Maybe I embody women this way and glorify God.

My deconstruction and reconstruction of gender through a gospel lens left me with a better and bigger understanding of who God is. That His ways are above mine, and that there will be things that I just can’t know with the few puzzle pieces I am holding. It was a choice. Do I trust Him or not?

I did give him an Ultimatum though, “God when you stop being enough, is when I go back to dating.” I haven’t been perfect, but He has never not been enough. 

I submit my gender to Him as well. I believe that our bodies matter. Starting with the sexual ethic of the Bible was a good launching pad for me to then conclude what I was going to do about my gender identity, transition or not. 

God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks for sharing about that part of your journey, Kat!
So if secular and progressive Christian “solutions” that Kat explored aren’t ultimately how God wants to lead Christians to think about gender ethics and make sense of gender incongruence, then how does God want to lead us?
How does God want us to offer the love and wisdom of Jesus to trans people.
Remember, we don’t speak for Willow. Your community is still discerning. And our goal here today isn’t to convince you of our convictions. We just want to describe the theological understanding that underpins the advice for pastoral care that we’ll share after this. And we want to kind of show you behind the curtain about how we make sense of these complex questions.
So, what does the Bible say about all of this?
What does the Bible have to say about all of this?
The Bible contains everything necessary and sufficient for salvation.

Almost nothing directly about gender incongruence, but some meaningful passages about biological sex and gender expression.

[Notes]
PIETER

While the Bible promises to contain everything necessary and sufficient for salvation, God did not intend for the Bible to provide Christians with the answers to every question they might have about the Christian’s life.
There are several passages that address biological sex and gender expression that can serve as building blocks for a faithful response to gender incongruence,
but the Bible doesn’t say anything directly about gender incongruence.
That doesn’t mean God doesn’t have wisdom for trans people. Or that it’s up to each of us to make up our own mind.

God has wisdom for us, He wants us to seek His wisdom, He’s not of two minds on this, and He has given us enough building blocks in Scripture to make sense of this.
Now, if we had time, we’d walk through 10 different passages of Scripture and dissect what each of those might offer us. But we don’t have time for that today. If you’re interested, we can provide you with our full notes on that. 

Instead, we’ll tease out Genesis 1-3 a bit, list the others, and fast-forward to some topline take-away’s.
Genesis 1-3
God intended for us to bear His image, including through sexual difference.

The author of Genesis likely meant to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.

[Notes]
KAT

So first, Genesis 1-3 narrates creation, including that of Adam and Eve. Importantly, God creates humans male and female, in His image. Biological sex difference between Adam and Eve was only one of the ways they reflected the diverse complexity of the Trinity and of Christ’s relationship with the Church.
Our bodies (including our given biological sex) are essential to bearing God’s image, suggesting there is a sacred integrity to maleness and femaleness. 
Interestingly, the Hebrew words for male and female are the same words used to describe the paired animals included in the ark to repopulate the world after the flood. 
Suggesting that central to God’s design for humans was their corresponding reproductive capacities given by their biological sex. As image-bearers, God created us each with a unique body that represents His craftsmanship and care that he puts into our physical being.
It is important to note that while common translations use the words “male and female”, the original text did not assume a duality between sex and gender or intend to narrowly communicate about biological sex. We can assume that the authors of Scripture meant these words to simultaneously communicate about both sex and gender.
Accordingly, you might read Genesis 1:27 in the following way:
“So God created mankind in his own image, in the image of God he created them; male man and female woman he created them.”
The Bible & Gender Ethics
Deuteronomy 22:5
Deuteronomy 23:1
Isaiah 56:1-5
Matthew 19:3-12
Matthew 22:30
Additional passages:
Acts 8:25-39
1 Corinthians 6:12-20
1 Corinthians 11:2-16
Galatians 3:27-28

[Notes]
KAT

Here’s a list of the other passages that our full notes will explore
Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?
Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) cross-dressed and gave himself in marriage as a wife
Cult practices to Ishtar included cross-dressing; similar in Phrygia w/ castration (300 BC)
Ovid (43 BC to 18 AD) wrote about gods granting Iphis a wish to be transformed from girl to boy

[Notes]
KAT

I think it’s worth addressing this question more fully: Were the authors of Scripture aware of transgender people?

Interestingly, they were aware of individuals who were biologically one sex but presented as someone of the opposite sex, and they were aware of individuals whose sexual anatomy had been surgically altered.
The Roman emperor Elagabalus (204-222 AD) dressed as a woman when trying to entice men, worked in brothels as a woman, and dressed as a bride and gave himself away as a wife when he married a male slave.
Ancient Mesopotomaian cult practices (6000 BC to 400 AD) included biological men whose “appearance either was feminine or had both male and female characteristics,” corresponding to a deity named Ishtar who was known for blurring gender expression.
Similar cult practices were seen in Phrygia where men were castrated, dressed as women, and played feminine roles in society (300 BC).

Just before the events of the New Testament, Ovid (43 BC to AD 18) wrote about a biological girl named Iphis whose mother raised her as a boy. Iphis finds herself attracted to women, asks the gods to transform her into a male, and her wish is granted.
In summary, the Bible…

Forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, & the elimination of gender difference
Affirms the sex and gender binary
Makes clear that genital mutilation doesn’t prevent people from being able to image God + be part of His family
Affirms dozens of times when men & women break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes

[Notes]
PIETER

Kat, thanks for highlighting a couple of those.
So, if we were able to dive deeply into each of those passages, here’s a summary of what we’d glean:
The Bible forbids genital mutilation, cross-dressing as part of cult practices, and the elimination of gender difference.
The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
But the Bible also makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family.
And the Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes.
Throughout the Bible, men are called to exemplify and reflect emotional states such as weeping in Psalm 51:10-11, tenderheartedness in Micah 6:8, and sensitivity to those around them, keeping peace, and showing deep affection for others through their physical and emotional connections in I Samuel 18:1-3.
Women also break many stereotypes. Proverbs 31 pictures a cunning, entrepreneurial businesswoman who works hard to provide for her family, and both the Old and New Testaments contain examples such as Deborah, Lydia, Rahab, Ruth, Naomi, Junia, Priscilla, Joanna, Susana, and Mary, along with many other wealthy women that helped support Jesus’ ministry.
Jesus Himself broke stereotypes by daring to associate with “sinful women’’ in Luke 7:47,50, and He even revealed His deity for the first time to the Samaritan woman at the well who would have been seen as the lowest of the low.

Key questions

What were God’s intentions for bio sex and gender?
To what extent did God prescribe bio sex and gender?
How is gender broken, biologically and culturally?
How can we conceptualize broken gender?
What were God’s intention? Can it change?
Is merely experiencing it a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can they take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Using those building blocks, let’s then answer the following questions:
What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender?
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?
How is gender broken, biologically and culturally?
How can we conceptualize broken gender?
How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God’s intention? Can it change?
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
If someone experiences gender incongruence, who are they in God’s eye?
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 
There is diversity and corresponding differentness in the Trinity, and God created humans in His image to display and point us back to that diversity and correspondence.

One such source of diversity and correspondence (among many) is biological sex and gender.

[Notes]
PIETER

First, What were God’s intentions for biological sex and gender? 

There is diversity and corresponding differentness in the Trinity, and God created humans in His image to display and point us back to that diversity and correspondence. One such source of diversity and correspondence (among many) is biological sex and gender.
But to say more than that, I lean on the work of theologians who are much smarter and studied than me who are deeply rooted in time-tested denominations. I’ve found the work of Karl Barth on this topic particularly helpful.

He was a Swiss Reformed theologian who lived from 1886 to 1968. He is often regarded as one of the greatest Protestant theologians of the 20th century. He heavily influenced Dietrich Bonhoeffer and supported the Confessing Church in Germany against the Nazis.

In his massive 6-million word systematic theology “Church Dogmatics”,
Barth explains that he both sees the Scriptures as absolutely authoritative
and has a great reverence for the Scriptures,
leading him to hesitate from overstating what we can glean from the Scriptures about God’s intentions for sexual difference. 
To what extent did God prescribe biological sex and gender?
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our bio sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship.

God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us. 

[Notes]
PIETER

He, among others, have consistently and narrowly defined faithfulness to our biological maleness or femaleness as:
Accepting our biological maleness or femaleness philosophically.That means recognizing in our mind (and later with our words and actions) that we are indeed biologically male or biologically female,
recognizing our potential for friendship and marriage as biologically sexed people and following God’s wisdom as we engage those capacities.
For Barth, this also highlights the narrow ways that a person can reject his or her biological sex:
By rejecting their biological maleness or femaleness outright. Rejection could be in our mind, through our words, or with our actions.
By engaging in sex outside of Christian marriage.
However, by Barth’s estimation, God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for males or females.

God didn’t communicate any further intentions about universal masculinity or femininity. He seems to have expected and even invited humans, with our authority and responsibility to care for and rule over Creation, to create beautiful cultures and to express our differences within those patterns of masculine and feminine expression.

As such, man-made gender prescriptions do not have moral weight and frequently change from generation to generation and culture to culture.

How is gender broken biologically and culturally?
Unfortunately, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders.

As such, most biblical examples of what it means to be male/female are imperfect.

[Notes]
KAT

Let’s move on to that third question: How is gender broken biologically and culturally?
Well, everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. When God first imagined each of us, He created us to be perfect in every way, including our biological sex and gender. But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin. Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our biological sex and gender.
But even as we were knit in the womb, we developed imperfectly and were corrupted physically at a genetic level, and then we were born into a world of sin. Nothing about who we are today is unmarred by the Fall, including our biological sex and gender.
We should not be surprised, then, when we find that our bodies, minds, and spirits experience and express sex and gender in broken ways.
This highlights another reason why the Scriptures provide limited wisdom for universal maleness/femaleness and masculinity/femininity: 
When we search the Bible for prescriptions about perfect maleness and femaleness, we are only provided with:
perfect examples in the Garden of Eden before the Fall 
in prophecy about the New Heaven and the New Earth
and in Jesus.
It is difficult to prescribe what correct gender experience and expression is other than what Pieter just described by:
accepting one’s biological maleness or femaleness, 
following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship
refraining from rejecting biological maleness or femaleness.
So, if everything in this world is broken, then our cultural understanding of gender is also broken…
How is cultural gender broken?
When we’ve arbitrarily assigned preference to one gender or another, how much distress and confusion have we caused our children?

All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender. Resist opportunities to arbitrarily assign preferences.

[Notes]
KAT

Here’s the problem with our cultural definitions of gender: Is pink a girl color? Is blue a boy color?
100 years ago, pink was considered the more masculine color because of its resemblance to red, and blue was considered dainty. Throughout the early and mid 1900s children wore mostly gender-neutral clothing and there was no sense of a color being associated with one gender or another. 
But once science allowed parents to learn a child’s sex long before birth, retailers sought to increase sales by marketing higher-priced, gender-differentiated clothes, blankets, and toys so that parents would spend more money preparing a baby’s room, including separating these items by color.
Our society has attributed some colors to one gender or another despite color preferences being unrelated to gender. Yet the impact of arbitrary gender prescriptions like these can be much worse than inflated prices. What happens when we ascribe something to gender that has nothing to do with gender?
Say a boy prefers the color pink: pink toys, pink clothing, pink blankets. Parents often respond with a forced choice for the child: either reject your preference for pink and choose to be a boy, or continue to prefer pink and experience shame. 
How much distress and confusion is caused by ascribing gender to preferences that have nothing to do with gender at all? How much shame and rejection do these forced choices create in children? Could these feelings lead a child to question whether they’re really a boy or really a girl?
All in this world must be redeemed, including our cultural concepts of gender. We would do well to resist opportunities to assign preferences to one gender or another. To be clear, we’re not trying to deconstruct gender. Instead, we hope to glean God’s intentions for gender so that the true nature of gender may be appreciated.
So God made us male or female.We’re called to honor God’s gift of our maleness and femaleness.Yet God chose not to define gender much further.Instead, He left humans to create beautiful cultures and to express our differentness in lots of ways, including through cultural patterns of gender expression.
But, the Fall has impacted everything, including our biological sexes, our genders, and our cultural definitions of gender.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
Concerned with what actions are sins
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
PIETER

Okay, fourth: How can Christians conceptualize or make sense of gender incongruence?

Well, Mark Yarhouse, a contemporary Christian psychologist that Willow has been learning from for the past few years, including a deep-dive with your Executive Team,
has suggested that there are three lenses through which Christian can view and seek to understand gender incongruence:
the integrity lens, the disability lens, and the diversity lens.
The integrity lens is primarily concerned with moral dimensions of gender incongruence and how Christians respond. Generally, when the Christian uses the integrity lens to evaluate any phenomena, they ask, “What actions are sins? What actions seem morally neutral? Which actions clearly glorify God?”

If a Christian seeks to understand gender incongruence exclusively through the integrity lens, the Christian should primarily explore whether different steps of social, hormonal, and surgical transition are sins or not.

How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
Recognize enduring physical brokenness and call on the Church to care for trans people
3. The Diversity Lens

[Notes]
PIETER

The disability lens focuses on recognizing a particular phenomena as an unchosen, enduring bodily brokenness that must be faithfully stewarded by the Christian
and demands the Church respond by providing metaphorical wheelchair access ramps to ensure that the believer managing enduring brokenness can fully enjoy God’s love and belonging with His people.

When Christians view gender incongruence through the disability lens, they recognize that gender incongruence is a brokenness as a result of living in a fallen world, but those navigating gender incongruence do not choose to experience incongruence nor is there a reliable method for eliminating gender incongruence.

Christians seeking to understand gender incongruence through the disability lens then recognize the responsibility of churches to care for trans people with God’s love and wisdom as those trans people faithfully submit their enduring brokenness to Jesus.
How can we conceptualize gender incongruence?
1. The Integrity Lens
2. The Disability Lens
3. The Diversity Lens
Celebrating unique testimonies, gifts, and strengths faithful trans Christians develop (and offer the Church) from submitting to God’s wisdom

[Notes]
PIETER

The diversity lens focuses on the ways a particular phenomena contributes to the beautiful complexity of the body of Christ. 

When Christians who hold a progressive gender ethic view gender incongruence through the diversity lens, they see the trans experience as a variation intended by God to contribute to the ways the body of Christ collectively images God.

However, when Christians anchored by historic interpretations of Scripture seek to understand gender incongruence through the diversity lens,
they ask how Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence may develop unique testimony, gifts, and strengths to offer the body of Christ particularly from stewarding their brokenness
(while recognizing that God did not intend gender incongruence or for gender incongruence to image God).
As Mark Yarhouse suggests, seeking to understand gender incongruence through any one of these lenses alone is inadequate. 

Like a kaleidoscope, the best way to appreciate the complexity of gender incongruence is to stack all three lenses on top of each other and seek to understand gender incongruence through them simultaneously.

There are simultaneously moral questions, an invitation to the Church to provide Christians faithfully navigating gender incongruence with the support they need to thrive,
and an opportunity to recognize and
appreciate the spiritual gifts trans Christians have developed from faithfully submitting their brokenness to Jesus.

If, however, Christians wonder in what order they should stack these lenses, we might suggest Christians foreground the disability lens slightly over the other two lenses, with the other two lenses prominently in frame just beyond the disability lens.

This arrangement properly balances God’s love and wisdom while appropriately challenging churches around how they will come around Christians navigating gender incongruence to do so faithfully.

How does gender incongruence develop? Was it God’s intention?
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown.

God didn’t intend gender incongruence. He intended for each to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman.

[Notes]
KAT

Next, using these lenses, what can we know about the development of gender incongruence and what God’s intentions were?
Like many things in life, gender incongruence develops from a combination of genetic and biological factors (nature) as well as cultural and familial influences (nurture). No one study points to a particular reason or source for why gender incongruence happens. Nature, Nurture, Yes. 
Additionally, God did not intend for anyone to experience gender incongruence. When God first imagined each of us being born into a perfect world, He intended for each of us to be either a male who feels fully like a man or a female who feels fully like a woman. 
When God creates humans in Genesis 1 and 2, He creates them mind, body, and spirit as male-bodied men and female-bodied women. We can assume that pre-fall, there was complete congruence between mind, body, and spirit, and therefore, between biological sex and felt gender.
 
That being said, it's true that Scripture never states explicitly that God intended every person pre-fall to be male-bodied men or female-bodied women. Similar to much of orthodoxy in historic Christianity, the Church has discerned with the Holy Spirit and through dialogue in the body of Christ further clarity needed for day-to-day life. 
But because everything in this world is broken, one of the ways some people were impacted by that brokenness is that they developed gender incongruence.
Does it change? Is there a formula for increasing likelihood of change?
No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence.

While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

[Notes]
KAT

But we want to be clear: no one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. And while some may experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence. Let me explain.
Interestingly, 80% of people who experience gender incongruence as a child experience relief from their gender incongruence by adulthood. It just goes away. Not because the child or their parents do any particular thing. They just get through puberty, and everything feels like it fits. However in about 20% of cases, gender incongruence persists.
But there’s no proven combination of counseling or pastoral care strategies or spiritual exercises to increase the likelihood of a person’s gender incongruence resolving. If an individual sees gender incongruence persisting beyond adolescence and into adulthood, it is likely going to be a lifelong experience.
To be clear, resolved incongruence does not mean that the child’s gender incongruence was ingenuine or that the child was merely confused. And it’s important to note that there is also no way to know for sure if gender incongruence will resolve, and as such, the experience should not be dismissed regardless of the age of the person experiencing incongruence.
Is merely experiencing gender incongruence a brokenness? A sin?
Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.

All are broken. God can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power. 

[Notes]
KAT

Gender incongruence is a brokenness and one of many manifestations of the brokenness of all of creation as a result of the Fall. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin.  
Gender incongruence, just like other forms of pain and brokenness, may tempt a person to soothe their discomfort in sinful ways or attempt to sinfully remake God’s gift of their biological sex, but a person does not sin until they say “yes” to temptation in thought, word, or deed.
And still, we should be quick to remember that even when we sin intentionally or unintentionally, grace abounds more through Jesus Christ. Every person experiences brokenness in one way or another, and because we all experience the hurt and pain that are byproducts of this brokenness, we as believers should be driven to show love and compassion. 
Certainly, in an ideal world people would not experience gender incongruence. Yet the beauty of God and His power is that our brokenness does not keep us from His love and grace because of His son, Jesus Christ. He can take what is broken and make it something greater, something more beautiful, something that points to His glory and power.
KEY QUESTION:If someone experiences gender incongruence, what determines who they are? Why?

[Notes]
PIETER

So, leaning on the theological understanding we’ve built so far,
I think we’re ready to ask the big question: who am I?

or more specifically, “How does a trans Christian know who they truly are? Know whether they’re supposed to be a man or a woman?”

Well, when any Christian asks, “Who am I? Who was I meant to be?” they’re ultimately asking about ontology
And only God can answer that question.

Ultimately, God knows best who each of us is fundamentally
Because God knows who He meant for each of us to be
And He sees us as we truly are better than anyone else
even better than ourselves

If any Christian is unsure of who they are and how God is inviting them to steward their story,
the best place to start is by exploring what God first intended

Well, as we’ve already stated, when God first imagined each of us born unblemished into a perfect world,
He imagined each of us as either male-bodied men or female-bodied women.

But we live in a broken world, and some experience a distressing incongruence between their biological sex and felt gender.

So when there’s gender incongruence, how do we know what God’s intentions were?



KEY QUESTION: Who am I?
When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.

Unfortunately, the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions.

[Notes]
PIETER

Well, If an individual is not intersex and their chromosomes, gonads, sexual anatomy, and secondary sex characteristics all indicate the same biological sex,
then we know God’s intentions for the individual’s biological sex.

We know whether someone is a male or female.

And then because we know an individual’s biological sex and we know God generally intended for each of us to be male-bodied men or female-bodied women, then we also know God’s intentions for an individual’s gender.
So when a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence,
we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their experience of their gender is broken.
We know which biological sex and gender God initially gifted them with.
We know who they truly are, in God’s eyes.
For example, if a person is biologically male,
then God intended for that person to be biologically male and feel mentally/psychologically like a man.
If this male experiences gender incongruence
and, as such, does not feel robustly like a man and instead feels more like a woman or somewhere in between a man and a woman, we can recognize that their experience of gender has been negatively impacted by the brokenness of Creation.

We know that God intended to offer this male his maleness and a sense of being a man as a sacred gift,
but unfortunately the downstream effects of the Fall have disrupted God’s intentions for the male’s gender.
Available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference does not exist, contribute to gender incongruence, or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex.
What about brain-sex / body-sex difference?

[Notes]
PIETER

Now, at this point, some might bring up the idea that most trans people actually experience a brain-sex/body-sex difference,
and as such should be treated as intersex people and we should recognize that we cannot know God’s intentions for their biological sex.

However, available evidence strongly suggests that a brain-sex/body-sex difference
does not exist,
contribute to gender incongruence,
or qualify a meaningful number of trans people as intersex.

Research has actually shown that the variation among male brains and among female brains is greater than the differences between the average male and female brain.

This variance is natural, but does not predict gender incongruence or make a person any more or less male or female.
God created us each uniquely and beautifully.
Our differences and our commonalities reflect God’s handiwork and His intentionality with us.
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

We’ve answered a lot of questions, but we’ve still got one admittedly difficult theological question left:

What steps can faithful trans* Christian take to reduce their distress?

First, let me describe steps that a person could take in three different ranges:
social transitioning, hormonal transitioning, and surgical transitioning.

Social transitioning can include name and/or pronoun changes, clothing, hairstyle, wrapping/taping, packing, bathroom use, voice training, etc.
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Social transitioning involves taking steps within one’s social circles to mitigate incongruence non-medically.

These include
name and/or pronoun changes,
adjustments to one’s appearance through clothing and hairstyle changes,
wrapping/taping to flatten the chest,
packing to give the appearance of having a bulge,
using single stall bathrooms,
using the bathroom of people of the opposite sex,
and voice training to raise or lower the pitch of one’s voice. 



What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?
Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning involves chemically altering secondary sex characteristics to align with gender identity
Surgical transitioning

[Notes]
PIETER

Hormonal transitioning involves
the use of Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) that chemically alters a person’s secondary sex characteristics to align with their gender identity. 



Social transitioning
Hormonal transitioning
Surgical transitioning includes breast augmentation, changing facial features, vocal cord surgery, and/or altering genitalia
What steps can faithful trans Christian take to reduce their distress?

[Notes]
PIETER

Even today, surgical transitioning is the riskiest aspect of transitioning.

It can include
adding or removing breasts,
various forms of plastic surgery to change facial features or enhance other parts of the body,
vocal cord surgeries, and
altering genitalia.

The most common terms associated with surgical transitioning is “top” (think top half of the body) and “bottom” (refers exclusively to genital alterations) surgery. 

Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) is a sin.

Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

So to what extent is each of these ranges of transition morally neutral or a sin?

Well, if a person who experiences gender incongruence is not intersex,
if we know God’s intentions for the individual’s sex and gender,
and if we know that the person’s gender experience is broken whereas their sex is as God intended,
then taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex can be sinful.
When a trans* Christian undergoes hormonal or surgical transition, they are at risk of responding to broken gender by breaking their biological sex and not being grateful for God’s gift of their sex and faithfully managing their broken gender.
However, in the range of steps considered social transition, the morality of many of those actions depends on the motivation behind the action.
Few of them are inherently sinful.

Each step of social transition could be taken as part of a rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex,
or each step of social transition could be taken merely to reduce the distress of a person’s gender incongruence,
while affirming internally and externally that they are ontologically the biological sex that God intended.

Transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.

Even if some transition may be sinful, it doesn’t remove a person’s ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

While we’ve already noted that transition does not effectively reduce suicide risk,
it’s helpful to remember that, in an ideal world, a trans Christian would consider the moral implications of transition from a place of
positive mental health,
a robust relationship with Jesus,
compassionate church discipleship,
and robust support from friends and family.

Unfortunately, this has rarely been the case. 

In reality, many have taken steps to transition
in times of mental unhealth,
before knowing Jesus,
after leaving the Christian faith,
without compassionate support,
and/or amid harassment from people who call themselves Christians.

When offering discipleship to trans people, as will be covered later with greater nuance, conversations about the morality of social/medical transition will rarely be a first or early conversation in pastoral care that imitates Christ’s love.
Additionally, just because someone chooses to medically transition does not remove their ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
We all make sinful decisions that affect our lives in significant ways,
yet we also know that God takes our sin and brokenness and redeems it for His glory and our good.

Kat, I’m curious, what’s your experiences been with various steps of transition and how do you think about those today?

Transition is rarely the solution to mental health challenges or suicide risk and can often serve to amplify negative outcomes.

Even if some transition may be sinful, it doesn’t remove a person’s ability to image God and represent Him to the world.
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
KAT

Those steps to reduce my gender incongruence have been a tricky thing to walk and live out. Before I began asking what God thought of me, there were certainly aspects of my life in which I was social transitioning. Most of the time when I left the house the goal was to pass as male. 
It was a crushing weight to live under. If someone recognized me as female, I felt like I had failed. Gender Incongruence is a funny thing. There would be times where I felt so feminine I didn’t recognize myself in the mirror. On the flipside, there were times that I appeared so masculine that I didn’t recognize myself in the mirror. 
As God was drawing me closer, I began to have “dialogue” about what clothing would be honoring to myself and to Him as the sexed being He created. To my surprise it wasn’t pink dresses that He led me to wear…it was my own style. Kat style. 
This mitigated the intensity of incongruence, while still allowing me to live uniquely as His child. 
Another example of a way I would socially transition, was through the shaving or not shaving of my legs. I found this came down to a heart posture. I don’t think God cares if we forget to shave our legs as women, or don’t have time. But I think the heart posture behind it is crucial. 
When I would not shave my legs intentionally, I was hoping people would recognize the masculine nature or even I myself would stare at it flirting with that rejection of biological sex. 
I sometimes don’t shave my legs, but it’s not with the posture to look more masculine, it’s probably because I just forgot or didn’t have time. 
Conversation about the morality of transition is incomplete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century.

What will Christian leaders do to reduce the distress of trans Christians faithfully stewarding their broken gender?
To what extent is transition morally neutral or a sin?

[Notes]
PIETER

Thanks Kat!
I also want to add that any conversation about the morality of transition
and the steps trans people take to address their distress
is incomplete without a confession of the sins of Christians over the past century.

Christians have overprescribed gender roles and rules, creating (in part) gender incongruence in some instances and amplifying gender incongruence in other instances.

While conservative advocates might accuse progressive advocates of Gnosticism by falling into mind/body dualism and valuing the mind over the body,
it could equally be argued that conservative advocates often fall into the reserve trap of valuing the body over the mind.

Even if we know that a trans person’s body is as God intended
and it is the mind that is broken,
a person’s gender is just as central to who they are.

Enduring gender incongruence is just as devastating and deserving of compassion as enduring a broken body.

If Christian leaders are going to invite trans Christians to honor God’s gift of their biological sex by refraining from hormonal/surgical transition,
and instead endure the pain of persisting gender incongruence,
then they need to honor the difficulty of that call, even if it’s true.

And recognize the ways that Christians leaders over the decades have made that difficulty greater by overprescribing gender.
God intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women.
Our biological sexes, our felt genders, and cultural gender prescriptions are broken.
God didn’t intend gender incongruence nor do people chose it. It’s a brokenness but not a sin. There’s no formula for changing it.
God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
PIETER

Let’s review what Kat and I understand to be God’s wisdom for trans Christians:
The Bible forbids genital mutilation (Deuteronomy 22:5 and Deuteronomy 23:1), cross-dressing as part of cult practices (1 Corinthians 11:2-16), and the elimination of gender difference (1 Corinthians 11:2-16). The Bible makes clear that genital mutilation does not prevent people from being able to image God and be part of His family (Isaiah 56:1-5, Acts 8:25-39). The Bible affirms dozens of times when men and women in the Bible break what we would consider to be contemporary gender stereotypes (Psalm 51:10-11, Micah 6:8, I Samuel 18:1-3, Proverbs 31, Judges 4:4, Acts 16:14, Luke 7:47,50). The authors of Scripture were aware of trans people.
God first intended for each of us to either be male-bodied men or female-bodied women (Genesis 1-3). The Bible affirms the sex and gender binary.
Faithfulness to our biological sex includes accepting our sex and following God’s wisdom when we engage our capacity for relationship. God didn’t provide any further universal prescriptions for maleness/femaleness or masculinity/femininity. He left the rest to us.
Everything about this world is broken, including each of our biological sexes and each of our genders. Cultural concepts of gender, including arbitrarily assigning preference to one gender or another, are broken.
Gender incongruence develops from a combination of nature and nurture, but specifics are unknown. God didn’t intend gender incongruence. No one chose to experience enduring, robust gender incongruence. Gender incongruence is a brokenness. Merely experiencing gender incongruence is not a sin. While 80% experience relief from gender incongruence over time, there’s no formula for “healing” gender incongruence.

If a person experiences gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. Social transition steps can be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.
God’s wisdom for trans people

[Notes]
PIETER

When a person is not intersex but they experience gender incongruence, we know that their biological sex is as God intended but their gender experience is broken.
Taking steps to alter one’s sex and reject God’s gift of their sex (hormonal or surgical transition) are sins. Social transition steps could be taken in a morally neutral way depending on one’s motivations.

pastoralcare

[Notes]
KAT

Okay, so now that we’ve built out a foundational understanding for this conversation, talked about leading with compassionate care in response to high suicide rates, and explored gender ethics, let’s wrap up our time together by focusing on some practical tools for pastoral care.

One thing that I have seen have a profound and positive impact on my friends who suffer with gender incongruence is community. 

What does this look like? Other people caring about them, asking questions about their day to day lives. Genuine interest in who they are as people, including them into rhythms of their life, and laughter. We don’t always click with everyone. They may not get our jokes or have all of the same interests, but that is ok. Keep at it. There is beauty in cultivating community and fulfilling one of the greatest commandments; Love your neighbor as yourself. 

Taking a genuine interest in your “neighbor”, loving them, is the greatest way that we can show the Kingdom. “By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another.” Invite others into your chaos, your quirky, your messy. Bring others in and keep bringing them. It doesn’t have to be hours on end, you can set limits and boundaries, that is also a loving picture. 

I have been deeply encouraged by the power of community. I would also encourage that your groups can be diverse. Diverse in age, interests, gender. They don’t all have to be an LGBTQ group, or a Trans group, or a pickleball group. For those truly desiring connections they will say yes. Offer what you can offer, God will do the rest.

Let’s dig deeper into that. And let’s get practical! How can discipleship embody God’s love and wisdom for trans Christians?
How to minister?
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor lack of choice + explore morally neutral relief
Support acceptance of brokenness/suffering
Address childhood shame from cultural gender
Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage to share their stories & gather

[Notes]
KAT

We’ve got seven suggestions:
Adopt a posture of empathy and compassion
Prioritize addressing mental health challenges
Honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Support acceptance of brokenness and suffering
Address childhood shame from cultural gender stereotypes
Give them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Encourage them to share their stories and gather

1. General posture for ministry
Resist ”transition or suicide!” & “just be normal!”
Instead, believe trans people when they share about their experience
Honor their lack of choice, the cost of faithful stewardship, and the Church’s responsibility
Commit to walking with them, helping them discern, and reminding them of Christ’s love for them and faithfulness to them

[Notes]
KAT

First, adopt a general posture of empathy and compassion

It’s easy to use that which we don’t understand as a target for jokes, sermon illustrations, blame shifting, or a focal point for anger and fear. But trans* people are not just a statistic on a screen, a political agenda, or a piece of legislature in the Senate. They are people made in the image of God who are valued greatly by Him, and as His church, should greatly value trans* people as well.
Every trans* person has their own story to tell, their own joys and sorrows, difficulties and triumphs, ways that God has allowed them to suffer, and ways that God has provided abundantly.
Ultimately, we’re looking for people who are safe. If there are jokes that are being made or harsh stereotypes (pitting genders against one another, outdated language such as tranny, etc.) then we will feel profoundly unsafe.
Instead, believe trans* people when they share about their experience. Recognize that trans* people have done nothing to bring about their gender incongruence. Honor that faithfully stewarding gender incongruence will be costly and demands the support of trans* people’s siblings in Christ.
Remind trans* Christians that Jesus cares for them and is with them in the pain and mess of life. While it is painfully difficult to live in a world (and a body) burdened by brokenness, brokenness will not be our experience forever; we have a hope and a future in Jesus for resurrected bodies and life when all will be made right.
Finally, take your time to build rapport with trans* Christians you’re ministering to. Patiently invest in relationships to earn their trust. Don’t be surprised when walking together is at times difficult and complicated. Commit to giving trans* Christians the benefit of the doubt, and commit to being quick to re-examine your own motivations and actions when trans* people you’re caring for feel hurt.
2. Prioritize addressing any mental health challenges
Proven interventions to reduce suicidality:
Talk therapy with a counselor to address grief/loss
Regular exercise/physical activity
Anti-depressants
A broader community of social support

[Notes]
PIETER

Second, prioritize addressing mental health challenges

Before jumping into heavy theological questions or difficult discernment about transition, help them gather the resources they need to care for any co-occurring mental health conditions they’re experiencing.
And focus on addressing those before anything else

Here’s those proven interventions for reducing depression and suicidality, for example
3. Honor lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
Recognize their lack of choice.

Help trans Christians resolve what they can by exploring morally neutral options for incongruence relief.

[Notes]
KAT

Third, honor their lack of choice and explore morally neutral relief
After adequately addressing mental health challenges, the trans* people you’re supporting will hopefully be in a better place to explore how they will steward their gender incongruence. Start by honoring their lack of choice.
Trans* people don’t choose to experience gender incongruence, but they do have the responsibility to faithfully steward their brokenness. Support trans* Christians as they consider morally neutral options in the range of social transition that might provide relief from the gender incongruence. 
Help them weigh each possibility and carefully step forward where the Lord leads. Help them resolve what they can and manage what they must.
4. Support acceptance of some brokenness/suffering
Help trans Christians manage what they must by accepting some level of enduring brokenness/suffering.

Hold space for them to grieve acceptance with anger, sadness, fear, and numbness.

[Notes]
KAT

Fourth, support their acceptance of some enduring brokenness and hardship

Even if a trans Christian you’re supporting takes some morally neutral steps to reduce their distress, they’ll likely continue to experience some level of persisting and painful gender incongruence.
And while hormonal and surgical transition have not been shown to effectively reduce suicidality, trans Christians yearning for further relief will certainly be burdened by cultural messages that further transition will eliminate their distress.

Step into that space and encourage trans* Christians you’re ministering to to resist further transition that is unlikely to provide the relief they desire, and instead invite them to accept some level of enduring brokenness.
Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their life. Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness. That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls!
Help trans* Christians you’re ministering to explore what Christians throughout the ages have written about suffering and how they found a way to accept persisting brokenness. Our churches desperately need to offer everyone a rich theology of suffering. If you’re a church that does this well, it’ll be particularly helpful for trans people you’re ministering to. And then hold space for them as they grieve this acceptance.
Some pain will be unavoidable.
Trans* people can’t avoid using a name for themselves, using pronouns, going to the bathroom, wearing clothes, or speaking with a pitched voice. There will be daily, unavoidable, and painful reminders for trans* people of their gender incongruence.
Make space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb. Reassure them that their feelings are valid and that their pain is real. Promise them that you won’t leave their side, and then stay.

5. Address any childhood shame from cultural gender
Childhood gender incongruence combines with shame for preferences contrary to gender stereotypes, amplifying internal shame & heightening fears of rejection.

Identify shame memories, feel through them, reject lies, and remember their value in Christ. 

[Notes]
KAT

Fifth, identify and heal any painful memories of being shamed for preferences contrary to cultural gender stereotypes.
Most of us, regardless of gender experience, can recall moments from our childhoods when we preferred something that kids of our biological sex weren’t supposed to prefer. Not based on any biblical prescriptions for gender but because of arbitrary gender over-prescriptions from culture. And then we were shamed by parents and siblings and friends and pastors.
Directly or indirectly, we were given a choice: 1) reject your preference, learn to dislike what you like, learn to like what you dislike, and internalize shame to fit in or 2) continue to like what you like, continue dislike what you dislike, and continue to be shamed and teased and rejected. It was a lose-lose for many kids and teens.
Forced choices are particularly painful for kids who experience gender incongruence, leading to shame and rejection. Some of the distress trans* Christians experience in the present may come from unprocessed childhood moments, they can haunt their present. 
Care for trans* Christians by helping them identify memories where they have felt shame, create space for them to process lingering sadness, anger or fear. Identify and name arbitrary forced choices while reassuring them of their inherent worth and value as image bearers. Celebrate God’s creativity and unique way He has designed others to express themselves, even when it’s contrary to cultural stereotypes.
I have found the best way to come against that crushing weight of cultural stereotypes has been finding people who see me for me. Who allow me to paint the picture of what I enjoy and don’t enjoy, rather than assumptions of stereotypes. 
For example, because Kat is a girl, she wouldn’t know how to change a tire or want to open this jar of spaghetti sauce. On the other hand, assuming Kat is trans masc, she wouldn’t want to watch the Devil Wears Prada. You’d be dead wrong, because I love that movie. 
6. Give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes
Parents and pastors can join trans Christians by resisting historical over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are, while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.

[Notes]
PIETER

Sixth, give permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes

American culture has arbitrarily attributed preferences and affinities to gender that have nothing inherently to do with gender.While the core of a trans* Christian’s distress is an internal sense that their biological sex and felt gender are incongruent,
feeling forced to comply with arbitrary cultural expectations can multiply distress.
Help trans* Christians reduce pain related to their gender by giving them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes.

Parents and pastors can join trans* Christians by resisting over-prescription of what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are,
while maintaining a God-ordained distinction between the biological sexes and genders.
Giving trans* Christians (and any Christian) permission to express themselves in culturally atypical ways may raise questions or concerns with siblings in Christ who are less aware of the arbitrary nature of gender stereotypes.

Pastors and parents can protect trans* Christians from harassment for their preferences and affinities
by engaging with concerned believers, assuring them that rejection of cultural gender does not mean rejection of God’s gift of one’s biological sex or gender.

7. Encourage to share their stories and gather together 
Trans Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved.

Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding.

[Notes]
KAT

And last but not least, pastors and parents should encourage Christians navigating gender incongruence to share their stories with siblings in Christ and gather with other trans* Christians.
Trans* Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved. They need to share their stories, and they need to see their siblings in Christ respond with curiosity and compassion. 
At the same time, our churches need to hear the stories of trans* Christians who are faithfully stewarding their brokenness. Cisgender Christians can learn from the courage and resiliency of trans* Christians, and cisgender Christians can gain self-awareness about the ways cultural gender stereotypes haunt them by empathizing with trans* Christians.
Pastors and parents also need to encourage trans* Christians to gather with other trans* Christians. Among those with shared experiences, Christians navigating gender incongruence will find unique support and understanding. 
Each of these opportunities for Christian fellowship can contribute to greater spiritual growth, discovering shared meaning in suffering, and enjoying healthy intimacy in a community of believers.
policies

[Notes]
PIETER

We’ve waited until now to talk about pronouns, names, bathrooms, and public presentation of leaders.
That’s intentional.

Too often that’s where divisive political conversation starts.
But until we’ve gotten to know trans people, cared for their immediate needs,
personally studied God’s wisdom for trans people,
and consistently offered compassionate pastoral care
–only after we’ve done all of that,
should we wade into these trickier policy questions.

But, we know you’ll be sucked into these conversations,
even if you’d prefer to avoid them,
so we want to offer you our opinions, our suggestions for how you could engage constructively.
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?

[Notes]
KAT

Coming out as trans and starting to use some of the language was a necessary part of my journey!! But it was messy. As I dabbled with LGBTQ+ language, I explored different pronouns. To be truthful I wanted to transition. I wanted to use he/him pronouns, but I also had a mom. I knew this would be hard on her, and make it even more difficult for her to really hear my heart in all this. So I used the pronouns they/them and/or encouraged others to use just my name instead of any pronoun. 
This for me was a bit of a holding place for me to explore a little while not jumping over too quickly. I think it was still hard for my mom to watch me experiment with they/them. I think it must have felt on some level a rejection of femaleness. 
As I began to study a little more of God’s definition of masculinity and femininity I began to understand why I needed space from gendered pronouns. When I heard the pronouns she/her I envisioned someone trying to put a paper doll dress cutout on top of me. I didn’t feel that it left room for someone like me.
It felt like I was being stuffed into a pink feminine box, so me deciding to use different pronouns was a rejection of stereotypes. Not necessarily a rejection of my biology. It was a way that I was trying to provide context for who I am and how I see the world. Because I felt that the question would never be asked or a way to provide context would not be given. 
It was then when I could use God’s lens of feminine that I could receive from others she/her pronouns. 
The first thing my brain is scanning when I have someone who is requesting a different pronoun is, will this kill the relationship? I want to gain relational currency with the person. If you suspect that the relationship will not continue if the pronouns are not honored…I would lean toward using them. 
For me personally, it could have been the thing to push me away from the church once and for all. You want to get to know somebody’s heart and where they need Jesus. Try and keep the communication lines open. 
If you are not in danger of losing the relationship and there seems to be some compromise on pronouns, like using a name or a nickname or a last name, I tend to favor that. I want to help mitigate the distress. 
I also want to keep things open so that they feel they can change their mind. If I got from she/her to he/him it might be difficult to walk it back. But if there is a nickname or something else we can use it’s almost like a placeholder. 
I tend to lean using the pronoun rather than not if I was forced to choose. But I think this is case by case and also your personal convictions as well.  

What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
Given names and biological pronouns can be a constant reminder of the pain and tension that is felt every day.

Identifying as trans can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence” or as much as “I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self” (and everything in between).

[Notes]
PIETER

Yeah, many people have a wide variety of opinions and beliefs when it comes to names/pronouns and identifying as trans*.
Identifying as trans, similar to identifying as gay, bi, lesbian, etc.,
can mean as little as “I experience gender incongruence”,
or as much as“I am fundamentally a trans person and must follow a trans cultural script to be true to self”,
(and everything in between).
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.

If someone you’re pastoring is considering name/pronoun changes, pray and discern together what God might be calling the person to.

[Notes]
PIETER
In early conversation, particularly if the person is not a Christian, practice language mirroring as hospitality.

Listen to the identifiers, names, and pronouns that the individual uses, and then use those same words as an act of hospitality.

You might ask the individual what they mean when they use those words.
Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language.

This is a simple but effective way to diffuse potential tension early in the relationship and open the door for future conversation.
For those using the word trans or alt pronouns or names to communicate that they are a fundamentally different kind of person and to signal a rejection of God’s gift of their biological sex,
you might have a different kind of conversation.

If the person is someone you’ve had years of relationship with
And you demonstrated your care for them
And they’ve invited you to disciple them through some of this stuff
Then you might push on them about the wisdom of them using those words.

Again, not because of the words themselves,
but because of the intentions behind the words.

You might ultimately choose to continue to respect their pronoun and name request, but you also will have registered with them your perspective that those preferences might not be wisest
This is really complex
You’ll notice that we’re hesitating from giving you a one-size-fits-all answer
Because we don’t feel like their are none
There’s so much nuance
For example, the difference between gender neutral pronouns versus opposite-gender pronouns.
Some Christians may feel comfortable using gender neutral pronouns because it could reasonably be argued that they’re neutral. They’re not necessarily communicating anything about gender ethics.
But those Christians might not be comfortable with opposite-gender pronouns because they seem to unavoidably signal a rejection of God’s gift of a person’s biological sex.
Or another example.
Consider the difference between name abbreviations versus long-standing nicknames versus new nicknames adopted specifically to signal social transition. Christians may feel comfortable with using the first two but not the last one.

What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
Respect the request of parents (particularly for kids and younger teens).

If older teens are driving themselves to activities, consider respecting their request.

[Notes]
PIETER
And then there’s the tricky case of what to do with minors.

The NextGen team will eventually share with yall how they will navigate these questions and how they invite you to do the same.

Here’s my suggestion: I default to respecting the preferences of parents, particularly if they’re kids or younger teens.

Ultimately, discipleship is parents’ responsibility, and I’ll respect that.
If parents want me to honor a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that.
If parents want me to ignore a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that. 

But in that case, I will clearly communicate to the kid that
God loves trans people.
He’s not surprised by the questions they’re navigating
or offended by their existence.
He wants to walk with them
and offer them His wisdom.
And I feel the same.
I love them.
I want to walk with them.

As a policy, I respect the request of parents, but I want them to know that that doesn’t change anything about my care for them.
I hope they’ll understand.

That being said, I’ll generally respect a kid or young teen’s request until I hear something otherwise from parents.

Now, when it comes to older teens who are driving themselves to church, for example, I’ll generally respect their request.
Okay, but I know what some of you are thinking.
Using these alternate names and pronouns around other kids is going to invariably lead to kids asking questions.
And to parents who disagree with pronoun/name hospitality raising concerns. 

How would we suggest you respond to those concerns?
What names & pronouns should faithful Christians use?
“That’s a great question. If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable, we like to do our best to use those words. Even if we personally don’t think those are the best words to use, we can choose to be polite and use those words.”

[Notes]
PIETER
Some churches may prefer to respond to kid with a standard response of,
“That’s a great question.
If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable,
we like to do our best to use those words. Even if we personally don’t think those are the best words to use,
we can choose to be polite and use those words.
Or you could say something like,
“That’s a great question.
God made girls with girl parts
and to feel like girls on the inside.
And He made boys with boy parts
and to feel like boys on the inside.
But for some people, it doesn’t feel like all of that lines up neatly and they’re figuring that out with their parents.
While they’re figuring that out,
we choose to be polite by using the names or other words that make people feel most comfortable.”
Or you could say,
“That’s a great question.
If people tell us that they prefer to go by a certain name or use other words that make them more comfortable,
we like to do our best to use those words. I’d encourage you to ask your parents about how they’d encourage you to think about this stuff.”
If a parent confronts you,
particularly if they’re most conservative, you could say something like,
“We respect the authority of parents to disciple their kids,
so if they want us to use alternate pronouns and names, we respect that request.
That doesn’t mean we agree with that request.
It just means that we defer to parents to raise their kids in the Lord.
If kids press us on the topic,
we note that
God made girls with girl parts
and to feel like girls on the inside.
And He made boys with boy parts
and to feel like boys on the inside.
Then we name that some kids don’t feel like all of that lines up neatly
and they’re figuring that out with their parents.
We clarify that we’re using the words people have asked us to use in order to be polite.
And we encourage kids to ask their parents how their parents encourage them to think about this stuff.”
So like I said, a lot of complexity,
a lot of nuance.
Eventually you’ll have clearer guidance from the NextGen team.
It may be similar or different from what I just offered, so don’t get too hung up on what I suggested if you strongly disagree.

The biggest thing I want to communicate is that we can be nuanced and polite
and defer to the authority of parents to raise their kids in the Lord.

What bathrooms should trans Christians use?
Most trans people prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms.

If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom.

[Notes]
KAT
Bathrooms were actually the catalyst for me to recognize that there was something I experienced differently with my gender. 
I had a fear of public restrooms. I thought everybody felt deeply uncomfortable in public restrooms…I mean that tracks, right?! 
I would limit my water intake (or worse my coffee intake) so that I wouldn’t have to use a public restroom. I would wait outside of a women’s restroom until my chances were good that no one was in there. 
The fear was about what others would say or if they would mistake me for a male. This wasn’t something I wanted to make political, or make a statement with…I just wanted to use the bathroom that was assigned to my bio sex. 
Like many trans people, I prefer to use single-occupancy bathrooms.
If you don’t have a single-occupancy bathroom at your church, I would encourage you to consider installing one or converting a current small bathroom.
To avoid controversy, you can label it as a “family” bathroom and privately communicate to trans people that it’s an all-gender single-occupancy bathroom available to them.
Many trans people will avoid using the bathroom at church if no single-occupancy bathrooms are available.
If you notice that someone is using a bathroom different than their biological sex, start with having respectful conversation to learn about their reasons for choosing to use a different bathroom.
Often, trans people will share painful or scary experiences in bathrooms associated with their biological sex.
With a deeper appreciation of their experience, you may find additional motivation to invest in creative solutions.
Different expectations for leader gender expression?
Churches may call leaders to narrower gender expression, allowing for more diverse gender expression from non-leaders.

But calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations may communicate an unspoken message that non-leaders conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved.

[Notes]
PIETER

And last, I want to address gender expression by leaders
And wisdom for public presentation of visitors vs. members vs. leaders

If a church defines rules for gender expression,
it is important that that church be able to defend those rules and apply those justifications consistently across all populations.

Remember that most standards for public presentation are culturally-created,
not instituted by God for all people in all places in all times.

And remember the ways that gender overprescription have exacerbated or created gender incongruence in faithful believers.

Churches may call leaders to more narrow gender expression, allowing for more diverse gender expression at the level of membership,
but asking leaders to conform to more traditional gender expression for the sake of those they lead.

At the same time, calling leaders to culturally-created gender expectations that are not morally necessary may communicate to membership an unspoken message that they must conform to culturally-created gender expectations in order to be loved,
creating a barrier to the gospel and discipleship under the Lordship of Jesus.
step intothe mess

[Notes]
KAT

We’ve covered *a lot* today.

We built out a foundational understanding for this conversation, talked about leading with compassionate care in response to high suicide rates, explored God’s wisdom for trans people, and offer some practical tools for pastoral care.
And for some of you, this is just the beginning of digging into God’s love and wisdom for those navigating gender incongruence. In the coming months the Belonging Team will provide you with more specific guidance for pastoring trans people and their loved ones. 
In the meantime, I want to leave you with a reminder and an encouragement.
I was so grateful to my mentor and others around me who allowed me to be messy.
But allowing mess doesn’t mean throwing out what’s true! There is room for truth, but we must have the relational currency and be invited into that space in order to give gracious truth.
I am so grateful that people around me listened to my heart language rather than deciding how my heart was based on the behaviors I was choosing. I think we can get caught in that. It’s easy to focus on someone’s habits with drugs, pornography, alcohol, being an overachiever, always needing to be right, whatever…as a true indication of where their heart is.
Instead, I want to encourage you to graciously step into the mess and be curious about how God sees this person in front of you, regardless of what you notice at first. When all of the broken stuff people use to try to survive is peeled back, what does God see in this person that He absolutely delights in?
Be curious! Be creative! Love God!
