God’s Love& Wisdom for Gay People

[Notes]
Today we’re going to be taking the next step in equipping you to offer God’s love and wisdom to gay people.
God’s Love & Wisdom
The challenges you face
Willow’s vision for ministry
How to respond when someone “comes out” to you
Tough questions in one-on-one discipleship

[Notes]
We’re going to do that by
syncing on the challenge you face in ministry
and Willow’s vision for meeting that need with God’s love and wisdom.
We’ll survey best practices for responding when someone comes out to you.
We’ll explore some of the toughest questions that come up in one-on-one pastoral care.
And then we’ll close with some Q&A based on questions you submitted!

Two quick notes: one about terminology and another about our focus today

I’m going to use a variety of terms and language: gay, sexual minority, same-sex attraction
When I use the word gay or sexual minority, I’m merely referring to the reality that people experience same-sex attraction
I don’t mean to communicate anything about a person’s theological convictions or history of romantic and sexual relationship.
I’m just using those words to mean “gals who like gals or guys who like guys.”
And I’m often going to use the word gay as an umbrella term to refer to gay, lesbian, and bisexual people.

I recognize that different Christians have different opinions about what words
faithful Christians who experience same-sex attraction should use to refer to themselves.
We’re not going to get into that today, but I also want to be clear that I’m not dismissing the importance of that conversation.
I just want to be clear what I mean when I use the words I do today.

Second, a quick note about our focus today and ministering to trans people and people experiencing gender incongruence
Empathetic and effective ministry to that population is really built on a whole different set of theological questions
And while the general pastoral posture for sexual minority ministry is transferable to ministering to trans people,
the specific guidance for discipleship is very different and deserves its own space.
So we’re going to set that topic and those questions aside for now,
but perhaps we’ll gather again in the future and address that very important area of ministry

ohh, and feel free to take notes during today’s training, but also rest assured that we will share training notes with you afterward
my story

[Notes]
So, why do each of my jobs have to do with sexuality and finding belonging in the body of Christ?
Why do these different kingdom callings matter to me?
Well, because I’m a Christian
I’m gay
and I am committed to a historic Christian sexual ethic

God’s best for every Christian is either
Vocational singleness (a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention) or
Christian marriage (a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man with an openness to raising children for the kingdom).
Historic Christian sexual ethic

[Notes]
I’m going to use that phrase “historic Christian sexual ethic” often today, so let me clarify what I mean by that.

In my opinion, a historic Christian sexual ethic is a belief that God’s best for every Christian is either

vocational singleness
(which is a lifetime vocation of abstinent singleness for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention)

or Christian marriage
(which Christians have historically understood to be a lifetime vocation of marriage between one Christian woman and one Christian man
with an openness to raising children for the sake of the kingdom)

my story

[Notes]
But it’s been a journey to get to where I am today

Before college I was ashamed of being gay, afraid others would find out and treat me poorly because of that
Between the ages of 13 and 23, I prayed 100s of prayers,
went to 100+ hours of counseling with a therapist who thought he could change my sexual orientation,
and spent 9 months with a pray-the-gay away ministry
But nothing changed about my same-sex attractions

I also felt alone because I didn’t think there was anyone else like me.
I grew up being taught by TV and the culture around me a horrible stereotype of gay people:
that they all went to group sex parties, that they all had AIDS, that they were all addicted to drugs, and that none of them wanted anything to do with God.
Based on that image, I didn’t think I belonged with gay people.
But on the other side, all of the Christians I knew were straight (or so I thought), and I was led to believe that in order to be a good Christian, you had to be straight.
And then there was me, stuck in the no-man's-land in the middle. I didn’t belong anywhere.
I was alone.

But out of this loneliness a desire to be known and loved grew.

Sharing this part of my story in college was a mixed bag
Throughout college, I devoted myself to a campus ministry.
I followed every instruction of my mentor, led Bible studies, represented the organization to the university, and planned recruitment efforts.
I was given every reason to believe I could join the campus ministry staff after college if I desired.
And then without warning, I was told not to apply to go on staff with that campus or at any university.
The only explanation given: we don’t know what to do with you and your attractions.

Thankfully, most responded to my story with love and compassion. During my sophomore year a gay brother in the Christian fraternity I was a part of was confronted about having sex with his boyfriend and left our fraternity

I took the scary step of sharing my story with the entire fraternity.

I needed straight brothers to know how to better love people like me, and I needed brothers who were gay to know that they weren’t alone. After I shared, my fear of being shunned turned to joyful surprise as brother after brother lined up to give me a hug and opened their phone to schedule a meal to get to know me better.

These men embodied Christ for me better than any church ever has.

After sharing with my fraternity, a number of guys who were gay and had similar beliefs as me shared with me about their story
We started making sense of life together
I realized that all of us were afraid that following Jesus' teachings meant that we would be alone
And none of us had parents or pastors who knew what to do with us—who knew how to help us

By my senior year in college, although I had gotten into medical school, I couldn’t shake the feeling that God instead wanted me to go into full-time ministry helping churches better love gay people like me
so I got my Master’s in counseling so that I could provide better one-on-one pastoral care to people like me
I started Equip in 2014 with the mission of equipping parents and pastors to better serve gay people according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
And I started the Nashville Family of Brothers in 2018 to offer celibate men like me lifelong, lived-in family
the challenge

[Notes]
So now that you know a little bit about me, let’s talk about you
Let’s talk about the real challenges you face in ministry
Because you've got a difficult task ahead of you
but it's not your fault that it's so difficult
The challenges you face
Historic Christian sexual ethics hasn’t seemed to lead to good and beautiful results in the lives of gay people.

God’s wisdom isn’t the problem. Instead, it’s the way many churches have embodied God’s wisdom.

[Notes]
when I talk to pastors and parents, I consistently hear them worry
that historic Christian sexual ethics don’t seem to be working for the gay people they know
and they wonder whether the problem is we've gotten our theology wrong

They've consistently taught (at least in one-on-one discipleship)
about God's wisdom for gay people
and they've invited gay Christians to steward their sexualities according to a historic Christian sexual ethic.
But it hasn't seemed to lead to good and beautiful in gay people’s lives.
Instead, the results have been bad and ugly.

I want to reassure you that the problem is not God's wisdom as Christians over the past 2,000 years and across the globe today consistently understand it.
And at the same time, the results of gay Christians attempting to steward their lives according to God's wisdom has often been bad and ugly,
because churches have historically failed to embody God's wisdom in ways that will lead to thriving,
which makes the task ahead of you difficult.
The challenges you face
It’s not your fault. You’ve inherited a discipleship debt from churches across the USA over the past 50 years.

[Notes]
not because you have done anything wrong,
but because you have inherited a discipleship debt, a pastoral debt (of sorts)
from all of the churches over the past 50 years that (sometimes intentionally, but often unintentionally)
failed to offer God's wisdom in ways that gay Christians could actually take hold of
The challenges you face
Christians were complicit in
housing and employment discrimination
hate crimes
false theology that it’s a sin to be tempted
false hope of sexual orientation change

[Notes]
for decades some Christians stood by as LGBT+ people experienced housing and employment discrimination
others joined in
Christians watched as hate crimes were committed against LGBT+ people
and some joined in
Christians taught a false theology that merely experiencing same-sex attraction was a sin
they promoted an anti-bible and anti-science false hope of sexual orientation change that led many LGBT+ people to take their life and even more to abandon Jesus
The challenges you face
Later, silence and uncertainty for teens.

Adolescents hid their sexuality in the closet, leading to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.

[Notes]
then in the 2000s and 2010s as cultural winds shifted, many churches shifted to silence.
Afraid to say the wrong thing, they said nothing at all.

but in this silence, 9-years-old's who noticed they experienced same-sex attraction
were still unsure whether they'd be loved if they shared about their sexuality
so they went into the closet
and spent an average of 5 years
making sense of their sexuality, often without the love and wisdom of parents—left alone with the lies of the Enemy and culture
leading to loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, addiction, abandoning God’s wisdom, suicide, and loss of faith.

By the time they shared with parents years later, they'd already abandoned God's wisdom or a belief in God altogether
The challenges you face
In that silence, everyday Christians arrived at their own conclusions about God’s wisdom, without the theological guidance of local pastors or mentors, assuming church silence meant all opinions were equally valid.

[Notes]
and in this silence, everyday Christians were left to figure out what God's wisdom was on sexual ethics all by themselves
without the theological guidance of local pastors and mentors
they assumed that their church's silence meant that all opinions were welcome
and that all opinions were equally true

The challenges you face
You’ve courageously chosen to offer wisdom and discipleship to Christians under your care (instead of silence).

But you’ve been met with resistance from everyday Christians who’ve been polarized.

[Notes]
so when you've courageously chosen to step back into that space
to help people better discern what God's wisdom really is for all of our sexualities–
to offer Christians under your care wisdom and guidance and discipleship
instead of the silence (or worse) of the past…
…you've been met with strong resistance from everyday Christians
who've gotten comfortable with whatever sexual ethic is most acceptable to their tribe on social media
and most convenient for their personal sensibilities

The challenges you face
And you’ve been met with resistance from gay people who are haunted by the wounds of the closet and have only ever seen gay people have to choose between Jesus and being happy.

[Notes]
and you've been met with even stronger resistance from gay people
who experienced those wounds of the closet
who experienced loneliness, anxiety, shame, depression, sexual sin, and addiction
from having to hide their sexuality for years
who are still haunted by those closet wounds
who have probably been impacted by some version of pray-the-gay-away theology
who never saw gay Christians publicly thriving according to a historic Christian sexual ethic
and instead only ever saw a choice between being lonely while following Jesus, or rejecting Jesus and being happy
The challenges you face
It is as difficult as it seems, and it’s not your fault. You’re inherited a debt.

That’s not fair. And being a Christian leader involves imitating Christ by willingly accepting unfair ministry circumstances

[Notes]
if that's what you feel when you get an email from someone or sit down with someone for coffee
you're not crazy
you're not alone
it really is that difficult
and it's not your fault

generations of leaders before you in churches across American made those decisions,
passing on that discipleship debt to you
and now, unfortunately, it's yours to steward

that's not fair
but often being a Christian leader is about imitating Christ by willingly accepting unfair ministry circumstances
and leaning into to a difficult task, perhaps a painful task,
for the sake of reaching everyone (but particularly those on the margins) with God's love and wisdom
The challenges you face
And there’s hope!

Your church can embody historic Christian sexual ethics in a ways that leads to thriving.

[Notes]
and I want to reassure you that there's hope
there is a way to embody a historic Christian sexual ethic in a way that leads to thriving in the lives of gay Christians
there is a way to clear that pastoral debt
God’s Love & Wisdom
The challenges you face
Willow’s vision for ministry
How to respond when someone “comes out” to you
Tough questions in one-on-one discipleship
Willow’s vision

[Notes]
Here’s is Willow’s plan to address that discipleship debt and offer God’s love and wisdom to gay people
Willow’s vision
Train staff to compassionately and effectively disciple around sexuality
Heart and posture
Theological formation
Practical ministry application
Assemble the Belonging Team to provide pastoral guidance

[Notes]
First, you are being trained to compassionately and effectively disciple around sexuality
with a focus on heart and posture, theological formation, and practical ministry application
You’ve already started that, and we’re continuing with that today!

Second, Willow has already assembled the Belonging Team to shepherd this process at Willow
and to provide compassionate long-term pastoral care to LGBT+ people
Willow’s vision
Teach everyday Christians how to extend God’s love and wisdom to LGBT+ people

Equip parents to lead kids in age appropriate conversation about sexual stewardship for all people

[Notes]
Then after establishing internal clarity
and building a strong consensus for the way forward
eventually Willow hopes to

teach everyone at Willow to extend God's love and wisdom to LGBT+ people

to Teach parents of young children how to lead kids ages 2-12 in age-appropriate conversation about sexual stewardship for all people before puberty, including God’s love and wisdom for gay people, so that children will share earlier about same-sex attractions, avoid the wounds of the closet, and embrace God’s wisdom
Willow’s vision
Raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship

Teach about and support singles and family in the body of Christ

[Notes]
to Raise the bar for everyone's sexual stewardship through fostering a healthy community of mutual accountability, leading to everyone thriving more according to God's good and weighty wisdom

and to Teach about the ways God values single people and encourage intentional Christian community where singles and marrieds who feel lonely can find more meaningful family in the body of Christ

God’s Love & Wisdom
The challenges you face
Willow’s vision for ministry
How to respond when someone “comes out” to you
Tough questions in one-on-one discipleship

[Notes]
so, how can you minister well to LGBT+ people?
in particular, how can you respond with the love, wisdom, and patience of Jesus when someone comes out to you?


when someone “comes out”

[Notes]
Well first, let’s define what it means for someone to come out
When someone “comes out”
Don’t assume that they’re convinced of a revisionist sexual ethic or are pursuing same-sex sex.

Remember that they’ve likely processed privately for years or decades.

[Notes]
Many mistakenly assume that those coming out are not only sharing about their sexual orientation but also making a public declaration of pursuing gay romance and sex.
Do some come out by also sharing about a secret same-sex partner or (not so) jokingly inviting friends to set them up on same-sex dates?
Yes.

But often people coming out haven't figured out what they think about relationships or decided how they think God thinks about sexual ethics
They're just sharing that they're a boy attracted to boys, a girls attracted to girls, or some combination of non-straight experience.

Coming out, then, is a process of privately recognizing and (eventually) sharing with others about one’s sexual orientation (a person's consistent pattern of sexual attractions).
When someone comes out publicly, they've likely processed privately for years or decades.
On average, teens wait five years after internally recognizing same-sex attractions to share with a parent or pastor.
When someone “comes out”
Sharing is risky: a majority of LGBT+ teens still experience bullying and too many are kicked out of their homes. 

Sexuality isn't the most important aspect of personhood, but it’s meaningful. People share in hopes of being fully known and fully loved.

[Notes]
Coming out is risky for an LGBT+ person, and our response (as Christians) matters.
Historically, coming out was dangerous.
Gay people experienced bullying, family rejection, psychologically dangerous treatments, employment and housing discrimination, and homophobic violence.
86% of LGBT+ teens today experience verbal harassment in their schools.
25% report being physically attacked at school.
Over half of LGBT+ youth fear being disowned by their parents after coming out (with almost 10% actually getting kicked out of their homes).

So why do they come out?
To be fully known and fully loved.
While a person's sexuality isn't the most important aspect of their personhood, it is meaningful.
Until an LGBT+ person shares about this part of their story, they aren't sure where they'll be fully loved when their story is fully known.

Not having to keep one's sexuality a secret anymore can…
alleviate stress,
lead to more genuine friendships,
help teens connect with peers of similar experiences,
and foster healthier intimacy with God.
When someone “comes out”
Avoid words/phrases like
homosexual
love the sinner hate the sin
gay lifestyle
sexual preference
Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve

[Notes]
Before we get to how you *should* respond, let’s talk about how *not* to respond

If someone shares with you, avoid words/phrases like "homosexual"
"love the sinner hate the sin",
"gay lifestyle",
"sexual preference",
"Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve", etc.
LGBT+ people experience these as micro-aggressions.

When someone “comes out”
Don't ask them to hide their orientation
Don't share w/ others w/out permission
Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change
Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation
Don’t make problematic sin comparisons

[Notes]
Don't ask someone to hide their sexual orientation.
God wants us to bring the challenges we face to our brothers and sisters in Christ and into the light.
Hiding often leads to shame and spiritual unhealth

Don't share their story with others without their permission.
“Outing” someone betrays their trust and may cause them to trust Jesus less.

Don't suggest they chose their attractions or they're likely to change.
As we’ll explore more soon, people do not choose which attractions they develop
and there’s no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
Suggesting the opposite leads to false hope and loss of faith.

Don't blame the "gay agenda" for their orientation.
As we’ll explore more soon, people develop their sexual orientation through a combination of genetic and childhood environmental factors,
but five-year-old’s noticing rainbow flags in their neighborhood or two people of the same sex holding hands
does not increase their likelihood of developing robust, enduring same-sex attractions.

Don’t make problematic sin comparisons like comparing same-sex attractions to alcoholism.
While some communities talk about addiction (including alcoholism) in more sensitive ways than past decades,
a comparison to alcoholism, for example, still insinuates that the attractions are the same-sex attracted person’s fault
and that their attractions are a form of addiction (neither of which are true).
When someone “comes out”
Reassure them that you love them, thank them for sharing, and recognize the risk they took. Practice term mirroring.

Be honest about how this new information changes (or doesn’t change) how you see them.

[Notes]
Okay, so how *can* we respond?
Front Christ’s love with your response

reassure them that you love them,
thank them for sharing,
and recognize the risk they took.

Instead of letting sexual identity language be a barrier to early conversation,
try practicing term mirroring as hospitality.
Listen to terminology the person uses (or ask them),
ask them what they mean when they use those words,
and then use those same words with those same definitions as an act of hospitality. 

Choosing to mirror those words with those meanings in early conversation
is not affirmation that the individual is using the best words and meanings,
but is instead an act of hospitality to avoid tension over language and open the door for future conversation.

Be honest.
If you can say honestly, "I don't see you differently. Nothing has changed," then say that.
Or if it fits better, you can say, "Anytime I learn more about someone, I see them differently, but not lesser.
I see you more fully, and now I want to get to know you even more!”
When someone “comes out”
Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn. Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation. Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.

[Notes]
If you genuinely want to get to know the person better (and that is welcomed),
make an effort to understand their experience at a deeper level.

Listen well by making eye contact, smiling, and listening-to-learn.
Offer physical and verbal affection, as appropriate.

Ohh, and don't ask loaded, high-stakes theological questions during your first conversation.
Or even during your second conversation.
Take your time getting to know this part of a person's story.
When someone “comes out”
Are you feeling/have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being/ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have Christians responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?

[Notes]
Okay, so someone's shared with you about their sexual orientation for the first time.
You reassured them of your love, thanked them for sharing,
and honored their courage.
You listened well and asked to meet again to get to know the LGBT+ person even more.
Now what?

Here's some good questions for your second conversation:

Are you feeling or have you ever felt suicidal?
Are you being or have you ever been bullied or teased?
How have your friends responded to you?
How have people at church responded to you?
Is there anything else you would like for me to know right now?
Do you prefer I share with others or maintain your privacy?
When someone “comes out”
What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

[Notes]
Then perhaps during a later conversation,
when you feel like you've demonstrated that you're safe and earned enough trust to asked theological questions,
try these questions:

What does your sexual orientation mean to you?
How do you describe your faith identity?
How does your sexual orientation intersect with your faith?
Are you planning to stay connected at church?

Note: these are just suggestions for *early* conversations.
If you already have a discipleship relationship with the individual,
you’d be negligent if that discipleship didn’t include conversation about their convictions and their sexual stewardship.
Even then, you need to have built up a meaningful amount of relational equity and trust before you directly address sexual ethics.

When someone “comes out”
Don’t put the cart before the horse: focus on salvation first.

If they’re a Christian but disagree about sex ethics, remember the sins of past Christians against LGBT+ people.

[Notes]
Ultimately, If the LGBT+ person you're meeting with has made clear they aren't convinced of a historic sexual ethic
and part of your motivation for getting to know them better is a hope they'll eventually embrace God's full love and wisdom for gay people,
remember this:

God's inconvenient but life-giving wisdom for sexual stewardship seems foolish to those who don't know Jesus.
If they’re not Christians yet, don't put the cart before the horse.
Focus first on offering them tastes of Christ's love through your friendship.

If they are Christians but aren't convinced of a historic Christian sexual ethic,
remember that churches have historically pushed gay people into pray-the-gay-away ministries,
enabled a double standard for gay vs. straight sexual ethics,
and condemned gay people to loneliness if committed to celibacy.
When someone “comes out”
Instead of debating sexual ethics, redirect conversation to more fundamental (and less emotionally loaded) faith questions:
Is there a God?
Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

[Notes]
For those reasons, any debate about sexual ethics will probably be too emotionally loaded to be helpful.
Instead, you can redirect disagreement about sexual ethics to conversation about more fundamental questions of faith
Because (interestingly enough) disagreement about sexual ethics is rarely about sexual ethics

Most of the time, if I've come to a different conclusion than someone else regarding sexual ethics,
it's merely a downstream result of disagreement on one of three much more important theological questions:

1. Is there a God?
2. Does that God know what's best for me better than I do?
3. Do we discover that God's best for us by reading the Bible with the historic Church?

Focus on these questions instead of arguing about sexual ethics
Because they’re often less emotionally loaded, lower-stakes conversations
And they’re actually more important than our different opinions on sexual ethics


God’s Love & Wisdom
The challenges you face
Willow’s vision for ministry
How to respond when someone “comes out” to you
Tough questions in one-on-one discipleship

[Notes]
Okay, so we’ve synced on Willow’s plan for offering God’s love and wisdom
and we’ve explored how to front Christ’s love in early conversations with LGBT+ people. 
pastoral care questions

[Notes]
Now let’s cover tough questions that come up in ongoing one-on-one pastoral care with gay people
and model how you can respond winsomely.

And as we work through these, can I invite you to give me a chance to pleasantly surprise you?

You’ve probably heard Christian leaders discuss these questions before,
but instead of assuming what you’re going to hear from me, could I ask you to really listen to the words I say.

I’m going to share with you from my deep commitment to biblical wisdom
and 1000s of hours of caring for LGBT+ people in counseling spaces
and my own personal experience growing up as a gay kid and making sense of my story through pain and tears.

At some points, I’ll say things that are challenging for those of you who are more culturally conservative than me.
And at other points, I’ll say things that are challenging for those of you who are more culturally liberal than me.

Please, lean in.
When you hear something you want to quickly dismiss, choose to listen even more carefully.
Give me a chance.
Pastoral Care Question 1
How do I know what God's wisdom is? Did Jesus even talk about gay people? Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

We discover God’s best for us by reading His Scriptures with the historic Church.

[Notes]
here’s our first tough question that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

How do I know what God's wisdom is?
Did Jesus even talk about gay people?
Why would a loving God deny me a loving marriage?

Here’s how I’d respond:
I believe God made the world perfectly, He gave us choice, and then humans chose to disobey Him. 
Our sin bent everything about the world, yet God looked back at the world, He noticed what would bring us harm,
but he also noticed the ways His best still shined through.

So He revealed to us in His Scripture what would bring us harm and what His best still is for us,
and He gave us the Church to read and interpret the Scriptures with

Whenever a Christian asks a question about morality, the right question to ask isn’t, “What can I get away with?”
Instead, it’s “What is God’s best for me?”
And we answer that question by studying His Scriptures
and discovering whether there’s a historic Christian consensus or a contemporary global Christian consensus on the question 
Pastoral Care Question 1
The whole of Scripture reveals God’s best for everyone’s sexuality: vocational singleness or Christian marriage.

We just need to read the words of Jesus.

[Notes]
But when we ask, “What’s God’s best for gay people?”,
we don’t even need to look at the verses that many believe call same-sex sexuality activity a sin.
They are meaningful evidence, but I don’t think they’re necessary to know God’s wisdom for my sexuality.

No, for me, what is truly convincing is not those few passages, but the whole of Scripture.
Consistently, Scripture reveals God’s design for our lives,
God’s order for the world, even in the midst of brokenness.
When it comes to what to do with our capacities for romance and sex, God seems to be pretty clear.
There are two options for all Christians: vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex

To arrive at that, we just need to read the words of Jesus…
Pastoral Care Question 1
In Matthew 19, Jesus defines marriage as a lifetime commitment between one woman and one man to serve God.

Then Jesus offers the alternative of lifetime abstinent singleness for the sake of kingdom work with undivided attention.

[Notes]
In twelve verses in Matthew 19, Jesus tells us everything we need to know

Jesus calls His people back to God’s original intentions for marriage
A lifelong marriage between one woman and one man to serve God, not themselves

And then Jesus introduces an alternative
Permanently giving up romance, marriage, sex, and biological children
for the sake of doing kingdom work with undivided attention

Those are God’s best for us
Christian marriage or vocational singleness
Regardless of sexual orientation

That’s what a vast majority of Christians have believe over the past 2,000 years
And that’s what the majority of global Christians believe today
Pastoral Care Question 1
Love = Willing the good of the other
Love = Empathy + Wisdom
Empathy – Wisdom ≠ Love
Wisdom – Empathy ≠ Love

[Notes]
Now some would respond, “But a loving God wouldn’t deny me a loving marriage”

The problem with this argument, is that when scripture says, “God is love,”
that doesn’t mean that whatever you think love is, God is for that.

It’s saying that God is the author of love, that the kind of love God offers is the original, the purest.
It’s saying that if you want to know what love really is, search for what God says love is.

We need a better understanding of love than just being nice or kind or giving people what they want.
Real love is willing someone to enjoy the best things life has to offer.
And the best things come from God, so loving someone is willing them to enjoy what God offers.
How do we know what God wants to offer us? By reading the Scriptures with the historic Church!

But it’s not enough to just point people toward the best things.
We have to help people take hold of them.
We have to empathize with their experience and be willing to sacrifice to help them thrive.

So love = empathy + wisdom
empathy without wisdom isn’t love
wisdom without empathy isn’t love

If we want to imitate God and love people,
we will invite them to take hold of the best things according to His wisdom and help them do so
Pastoral Care Question 2
Do you think I chose to be gay? Or do you believe I was born gay?

No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.

[Notes]
here’s a second set of tough questions:

Do you think I chose to be gay?
Or do you believe I was born gay?

Here’s how I would respond:

I want to be direct: I never chose to experience same-sex attraction,
and those of you who are straight never chose to experience opposite-sex attraction.
No one chooses what sexual attractions they will develop.
Pastoral Care Question 2
Why is the “born gay or choose to be gay” question important for many?

*If* people were born gay, many assume that would mean God meant for people to be gay and would bless gay marriages.

[Notes]
Now to the second question: Are people born gay?

Before we go further, let’s reflect on why this question is so important.
Commonly, if we knew that people were born gay, many would assume that God intended people to be gay.

And if God intended people to be gay,
He must support those people following their God-given desires for monogamous relationships with people of the opposite sex.

So are people born gay?
Pastoral Care Question 2
Yet, consistent scientific studies show that same-sex attractions are predisposed but not genetically determined. People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists is that genetic and environmental factors contribute to sexual orientation development.

[Notes]
An average of scientific studies of twins where one twin is gay, lesbian, or bisexual
found that around 40% of the time, the other twin was gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

If the development of same-sex attraction were genetically determined, this number would be 100%,
so scientific evidence supports the conclusion that same-sex attraction is genetically predisposed but not genetically determined.

People are not born gay.

Instead, the consensus of scientists across the spectrum is that both genetic/biological and environmental factors
contribute to the development of same-sex attraction.
Pastoral Care Question 2
No one is genetically determined to develop SSAs or choose to develop SSAs.

Even so, science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions because none of us are how God first made us to be.

[Notes]
So are we born gay or do we choose to be gay?
I say neither.

More accurately, no one is born gay (genetically determined to experience same-sex attraction)
neither does anyone choose to be gay (to experience same-sex attraction).

But even if we became convinced that sexual orientation is genetically determined
Even if some flood of new research outweighed consistent results from decades of sexual orientation development research,
even if that were the case, that doesn’t mean that God intended for people to be gay.

God’s intentions aren’t a scientific question, they’re a theological one.
Science can’t answer the question of God’s intentions,
because none of us are how God made us to be.
None of us are born how God first imagined us to be.

Which leads us to our next question…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Did God intend for me to be gay? Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.

[Notes]
Did God intend for me to be gay?
Is my sexuality broken? Sinful?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Well, as I understand it, Romans 1 teaches that same-sex sexual desires are broken and contrary to God’s first intentions.
God does not intend for anyone to experience same-sex attraction
or to engage in same-sex romantic or sexual relationships.

Yet I experience same-sex attractions,
so clearly God allowed it, even if it wasn’t his intentions for me!
How does that make sense?
We’ll come back to that…
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a result of the Fall.

All of us were corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb, and were born into a broken world that wounded us.

[Notes]
What, then, are same-sex attractions?

Well, I believe that experiencing same-sex attraction,
people finding other people of the same sex physically attractive and desiring romantic relationships with them,
being gay,
is a result of the Fall.

I believe that when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, their sin led to a domino effect of brokenness.
Their sin bent all of the ways God had perfectly designed and ordered this world,
To the extent that this world around us, the people around us, and even ourselves are not how God first imagined us.

None of us are how God intended.
All of us, regardless of sexual orientation, are corrupted at a genetic level, developed imperfectly in our mother’s womb,
and were born into a broken world that wounded us long before we ever gained the capacity to sin.

So I don’t think that when God first imagined me and projected me being born into a perfect world,
God planned for me to experience same-sex attraction.

But because I was born into a broken world,
one of the ways I was affected by that brokenness is that I gained these attractions.
Pastoral Care Question 3
Experiencing same-sex attraction is a brokenness and temptation, but it is not a sin.

While we don’t choose who we’re attracted to, we do choose how we steward our desires.

[Notes]
But I want to be clear that being gay, experiencing same-sex attraction, is not a sin.
It is a brokenness, a temptation to sin,
but God doesn’t hold against anyone their involuntary thoughts.
God does not send people to hell merely because boys are attracted to boys or girls are attracted to girls

Yet while we don’t choose who we are attracted to, 
We do choose how we respond.
Every person is responsible for stewarding their sexuality in God-honoring ways, regardless of their sexual orientation.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

God has the power to do miracles, and scientific studies have shown sexual orientation change efforts to be harmfully ineffective.

[Notes]
maybe you’ll be asked this fourth tough question:

Will you try to change my sexual orientation?

Here’s how I’d respond:

I want to be clear: there is no formula for changing a person’s attractions.
There’s no proven combination of prayer or counseling or weekend retreats to change someone’s sexual orientation.

Certainly God has the power to do whatever he wants,
but scientific studies show that 96% of people who seek sexual orientation change efforts
experience no change in their sexual orientation,
but they do experience a 92% increase in suicidality due to sexual orientation change efforts (nearly doubling suicide attempts).

Pastoral Care Question 4
If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay, yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when asked, how is that fair?

Why do bad things happen to innocent people?

[Notes]
Now at this point, many people reasonably ask:

If same-sex attractions are broken, God didn’t intend for anyone to be gay,
yet God allowed that brokenness to develop and rarely heals that brokenness when people ask God for healing,
how is that fair?

At the core of that question is the timeless question: Why do bad things happen to innocent people?
Right?
Because people don’t choose their sexual orientation, and gay people haven’t done anything to bring about their sexual orientation.
They’re innocent.
So why?

Pastoral Care Question 4
For our choices to love God and each other to matter, God chooses to allow the consequences of our decisions to play out (including our mistaken decisions).

[Notes]
Well, in order for us to have real choice and true agency to choose to love God and other people,
God lets the consequences of our decisions play out.
It’s the theological concept of free process.

If God just swooped in and protected each of us from the consequences of the sins of others,
would their choices have been real choice?
No

So in order for our love for God and each other to mean something,
God chooses the greater good of allowing things to play out.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Same-sex attractions develop because of the sins of others, going all the way back to Adam and Eve.

To protect free will, God allows people to develop same-sex attractions.

[Notes]
How do I think that applies to broken sexuality?

I believe that I developed same-sex attractions because of the sins of others.

Perhaps brokenness in my genes passed down from previous generations, going all the way back to Adam and Even.
Or perhaps brokenness and sin in the home and community I grew up in.
To be clear, scientists don't know specifically what factors from a person's upbringing contribute.
There is no evidence that less-than-ideal parenting or sexual abuse increases a person’s likelihood of developing same-sex attractions.

But then to protect my free will,
God chose not to swoop in and prevent me from developing same-sex attractions by blocking the consequences of the decisions of others.
Pastoral Care Question 4
Yet, God has promised to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good!

[Notes]
Thankfully, God has promised us
(and I’ve absolutely seen it to be true in my life)
that He is faithful to redeem our brokenness for His glory and our good.

It’s been particularly through submitting my brokenness to God and faithfully stewarding my enduring brokenness
that I’ve experienced the most beauty and community and meaning in my life.

Pastoral Care Question 5
Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Scientific evidence shows that historic Christian sexual ethics preserves life more than the alternatives.

Pray-the-gay-away causes suicide.

[Notes]
here’s our fifth set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship

Is God's wisdom good? Is it fair?

Here’s how I’d respond:

Many worry that historic Christian sexual ethics increases a gay person’s risk of suicide.
So, is God’s wisdom actually bad for gay people?
Well there's scientific evidence to prove that historic Christian sexual ethics doesn't increase gay suicide.
It actually preserves life more than a revisionist sexual ethic or ex-gay theology

Scientific studies have found that participation in sexual orientation changes efforts
nearly doubles your risk of suicide (increases by 92%).
So pray-the-gay-away theology does cause suicide.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Too often, revisionist sexual ethics leads to loss of faith for gay Christians.

That is a death of another kind.

[Notes]
On the other extreme, while a revisionist sexual ethic may not commonly lead to suicide,
too often I’ve seen that sexual ethic lead to deconstruction and abandoning one's faith.
Most of my gay Christian friends who adopted a progressive sexual ethic eventually stopped believing in God.

Many of them follow a sad, but logical trajectory:
At first, they perform theological acrobatics to read the Bible in support of same-sex marriages.
Then after a while, they reluctantly agree with a majority of queer theologians
who say that the Bible probably says what Christians have understood it to say for 2000 years:
the God of the Bible condemns gay sex and gay marriage.

Yet these gay Christians continue to believe that the *real* God supports gay marriage.
The Bible is just outdated and lacks authority or relevance for modern people.
But once they decided that the Bible and the Church couldn’t tell them who God is,
they realized they were just worshiping a God they came up with in their own minds. 
they wondered, "What’s the likelihood that the God of my imagination is real?"
Eventually they stopped believing in God all together. 

Today, very few of the gay Christians I know who have been followed a revisionist sexual ethic for at least five years
can make an unqualified confession of an historical understanding of the Nicene Creed and denounce mutually exclusive claims.

Perhaps this trend is an anomaly among the gay people I know,
but when I share this observation publicly, gay and straight people consistently private-message me,
“Wow, I thought this was only happening to *my* friends. I’ve been afraid to speak up.”

And to be clear, I don’t want that for my gay friends.
I want all of them to have robust relationships with God.
But the consistent results I see of a revisionist sexual ethic is my gay friends losing their faith.

That is a death of another kind.



Pastoral Care Question 5
Scientific research found that historic Christian sexual ethics promotes mental and spiritual health in gay Christians.

A combination of empathy and God’s wisdom leads to the best results.

[Notes]
Then in the middle of these two extremes,
how does a compassionate embodiment of historic Christian sexual ethics impact mental and spiritual health?

Research by Olya Zaporozhet and Mark Yarhouse published in 2019 found that
gay celibate Christians scored in the normal range of mental health compared to the average American.
And then gay celibate Christians scored higher than average overall life satisfaction.

While limited, this evidence suggests that a compassionate historic Christian sexual ethic
promotes mental and spiritual health, unlike theological extremes in each direction.

So, if your primary concern is the health of kids and teens,
don't be fooled into thinking you must abandon God's wisdom or compassion.
Embrace both, and take practical steps to help gay people in your church steward their sexualities in God-honoring and life-giving ways!
Pastoral Care Question 5
Yet, churches have often promoted a double standard of sexual stewardship.

They taught that straight people need romance and can assume marriage, but then taught the opposite for gay people.

[Notes]
Okay, so maybe embodying God’s wisdom in the best ways can actually be good
But historically, has it been fair?

Admittedly, no.

Many churches lead straight Christians to assume that they will get married,
teach that we need romantic companionship to be happy,
and ignore the Bible’s teachings about vocational singleness and divorce.

But then these same churches call gay Christians to a higher standard of sexual stewardship
by teaching that gay Christians don’t need romance or sex
and challenging them to consider vocational singleness.
Pastoral Care Question 5
Churches lost credibility to call gay people to God’s wisdom, and it hurt straight people.

Instead, we can raise the bar for everyone’s sexual stewardship.

[Notes]
This inconsistent, hypocritical application of Scripture tempts sexual minorities to adopt a victim mentality
and reject sexual morality standards because of the apparent double standard.
Churches lose credibility to ask gay Christians to live according to biblical wisdom
when they refuse to hold straight Christians accountable to that same wisdom.

Yet this inconsistent standard hurts straight Christians as well.
Straight Christian marriages end in divorce at the same rate as non-Christian marriages,
and unmarried straight Christians suffer from a lack of support in the church.

Instead, I think churches ought to invite everyone to steward their sexualities according to God’s good and weighty wisdom.

This might include examining whether straight Christians are engaging in casual romance,
having sex outside of marriage, making little or no progress on refraining from the use of pornography,
failing to consider a call to vocational singleness, unthinkingly refusing an openness to raising children for the kingdom in marriage,
or engaging in unbiblical divorce/remarriage.

These steps will eliminate discriminatory application of God’s inconvenient wisdom
and prevent a victim mentality among LGBT+ people.
Pastoral Care Question 6
Can I truly be happy without romance or sex? Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom? Or is God offering me something else?

The Scriptures neither promise romance or marriage nor say they’re necessary for a full life.

[Notes]
and here’s our last set of tough questions that might come up in one-on-one discipleship:

Can I truly be happy without romance or sex?
Do I have to be lonely to obey God's wisdom?
Or is God offering me something else?

Here’s how I’d respond:

To put it plainly: you don’t need romance or sex to be happy,
but no, you don’t have to be lonely to obey God’s wisdom.

None of us are promised romance or sex in the Scriptures.
None of us need romance or sex to be happy.
A belief that either of those are promised or needed is a lie of romance idolatry that is contrary to Scripture.
Pastoral Care Question 6
“But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God’s desire.”

Everyone should have a healthy appreciation for marriage and children. Those aren’t indications of God’s calling.

[Notes]
Some might object, “But I want to marry and have kids. That must be God's desire."

By that logic—that a desire to marry, a desire to be a parent, or a difficulty being single
tells us we’re called to marriage—
the only people who are called to vocational singleness are asexual people.

Clearly that was not Christ’s intention.

Most of the celibate Protestants and Catholics I know still experienced a healthy desire
for marriage, sex, and children before committing to vocational singleness,
so those desires aren’t an indication of God’s preference.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!”

In light of the Fall, romance and polyamory come easily to us, not celibacy or monogamy. Neither are natural. Both require a gift.

[Notes]
Others might argue, "But singleness is too difficult and isn't natural!"

Well, Christian marriage and vocational singleness are actually equally unnatural.

Does the average Christian automatically possess everything they need to thrive in vocational singleness?
No. But the same is true of Christian marriage.

We don’t inherently have what we need to do marriage well either.
In light of the Fall, romance, sex, and polyamory are what come easily to us, not faithful celibacy or faithful monogamy.

Each of us has the same inherent but incomplete capacity for both vocational singleness and Christian marriage.
But to do either well, we must step into that vocation and receive an additional gift to do it well.
Pastoral Care Question 6
"Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn? So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

We shouldn’t commit to vocational singleness without the gift. But Jesus also says we shouldn’t commit to Christian marriage without the gift.

[Notes]
And still others might argue, "Doesn't 1 Cor 7:9 say that it's better to marry than to burn?
So if I don't find abstinence easy, that means I'm supposed to get married, right?!”

That's a common misinterpretation.

Instead, Paul was narrowly addressing a group of Corinthian Christians
who had adopted strange beliefs that their bodies didn't matter,
so they were claiming to be celibate "in spirit" but then were engaging in unrestrained sexual immorality.
Paul was chastising people who claimed to be celibate but weren't actually trying.

Regardless, we should read 1 Cor 7:9 to caution us against committing to vocational singleness
unless we have the gift from God to do it well.

But Jesus said the same about Christian marriage in Matthew 19:
don't commit to Christian marriage unless you have the gift from God to do it well.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in family—including vocational singles.

But too often, single Christians either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups or they get tired of the pain of disconnecting (and instead resolve to live alone).

[Notes]
Yet even though we’re not promised romance or marriage,
everyone is called to lifelong, lived-in human family.
Even those called to vocational singleness!

Vocational singleness isn’t a call to any less family in the body of Christ.
It just looks different.
And unfortunately, most churches have struggled to support it.

Too often, single Christians, regardless of sexual orientation either live with a revolving door of roommates and small groups,
of they get tired of the pain of connecting and disconnecting, and instead just resolve to live alone.

Pastoral Care Question 6
Instead churches can celebrate commitments to vocational singleness and celebrate the kingdom work of vocational singles.

Then churches can help vocational singles building intentional Christian community where they can find lived-in, lifelong family.

[Notes]
Instead, I think churches ought to celebrate vocational singles committing to their calling
with just as much pomp and circumstance as you do weddings.
Then celebrate the kingdom work that vocational singles are able to do
with their undivided attention just as much as we honor kids.

Then churches can help those called to vocational singleness find lifelong, lived-in human family.
Gather singles and cast vision for intentional Christian community.
Offer coaching, accountability, and financial support.

The first administrative task of the Church in Acts 6 was to gather celibate women 
and offer them practical support to build family with each other.
It’s at the core of the Church’s DNA to foster family for vocational singles.

After college, I was part of four different houses with vague aspirations of intentional Christian community.
Unfortunately, each fell apart because guys got married, moved for a job, or ran away from conflict.

Then in 2017, I met with the late Father Thomas McKenzie (my former Anglican priest)
to share that I felt called to vocational singleness but didn’t feel a magical gift of celibacy such that I didn’t need human family.
I asked, “How can I find the family in the body of Christ that I need at our church?”
Here’s how he responded:

“To be honest, I don’t think you’re going to find the kind of family you need at our church or any church in Nashville any time soon.
But monasticism has been the most common way celibate people have found family. 
It’s been the greatest source of evangelism in the Church, the greatest source of theology in the Church,
and the greatest source of social justice in the Church.
I think you should start something in Nashville, build the family you need, and stay connected to our church to teach us how to do family better.
Find three other people, commit to doing something together for a year, and see what happens!"

Fast forward to today, the Nashville Family of Brothers is an ecumenically Christian monastery
building family in Nashville for men called to vocational singleness.
We’re still a part of our local churches.
We’ve got jobs outside of the brotherhood leveraged for the sake of the kingdom.
We’re still connected to parents and their kids.

Plus seven of us pray and eat and worship and vacation and serve and live together in a home as a family
while we discern how God is calling us to leverage our singleness for the sake of the kingdom
and discern whether to make lifetime commitments to each other.
q&a
