God’s Love& Wisdom for Trans People
Q&A
teach everykid about biosex & gender

[Notes]
KAT

If not gender roles or tight boxes around masculinity and femininity, what can we teach boys and girls about their sex and their gender?
Kid notice differences between boys/girls as young as 18 mo
categorize their own gender by age 4
aware of gender expectations by age 5
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Kids become aware of differences between boys and girls as young as eighteen months of age, and most kids can categorize their own gender by age three or four.
By age five, kids are aware of the gender expectations of their parents, school, church, and social circle.
This means that speaking to children about gender and the good gift of sex difference should be an ongoing conversation with kids of all ages.
the gospel
to follow God’s commands for all believers
fruits of the Spirit, respecting image bearers, offering family, resisting idols, becoming more like Jesus, loving well
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Teach boys and girls the gospel.
Everything else is secondary to the gospel. It is the gospel that informs how we are to live.

Teach boys and girls to follow God’s commands for all believers.
Scripture describes holiness, godliness, and Christian living in universal terms. There aren’t separate lists of commands/virtues for males and females. Teach your boys and girls to
display the fruits of the Spirit (Gal 5:22-23)
recognize and respect the value of all image bearers (Rom 12:10, Gen 1:27)
be family for others in the Body of Christ (Rom 12:10, 1 Cor 11:33)
relinquish the idol of control, to serve, to pursue humility (Phil 2:3, Gal 5:13, Rom 12:3, 10, 16)
sacrifice their own desires for God’s and be transformed (Rom 12:1-2)
focus on unity with other believers (Gal 3:28, Eph 4:3, Col 3:14, Eph 2:14)
commit to the flourishing of everyone (Rom 14:19, 1 Thess 5:11, 1 Cor 14:12)
be known by their love for other believers (Jn 13:35)

affirm that girls are girls regardless of mannerisms, expression, personality, etc.
affirm that boys are boys, regardless of mannerisms, expression, personality, etc.
remind kids that God created them to be boys or girls, that their bodies are good and matter
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Affirm boys and girls. 
Affirm that a boy is a boy regardless of his mannerisms, expression, personality, interests, voice pitch, clothing choices, or anything else, because the body God gave him is that of a boy.
Affirm that a girl is a girl regardless of her mannerisms, expression, personality, interests, hair length, clothing choices, or anything else, because the body God gave her is that of a girl. 

Speak positively about being a girl or being a boy.
Remind kids that their bodies are good because God created them, that God was intentional about creating boys and girls. Teach them that God made them the biological sex that they are and that their biological sex is good.
God designed our bodies with purpose; our physical bodies matter.
“How do I know you’re a girl? God created girls to have vaginas, breasts, and a womb/uterus. You have a vagina and a uterus. One day when you’re older you’ll have breasts. There are even tiny little pieces of humans called chromosomes that tell our bodies whether we’re a girl or a boy - girls have two X chromosomes and boys have an X and a Y!”
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Here’s some examples of things you could say:

“You are a boy. God created you a boy, and boys are good! When you play baseball, you’re playing baseball like a boy. When you take piano lessons, you’re learning to play piano like a boy. When you cry because you’re sad, you cry like a boy. God created you as a boy on purpose and whatever you do, you’re doing that as a boy for the glory of God! You are masculine because God created you, body and soul in unity, as a boy.”

Or:

“How do I know you’re a girl? God created girls to have vaginas, breasts, and a womb/uterus. You have a vagina and a uterus. One day when you’re older you’ll have breasts. There are even tiny little pieces of humans called chromosomes that tell our bodies whether we’re a girl or a boy - girls have two X chromosomes and boys have an X and a Y!”

Note that boys and girls are same, yet different
Male and female bodies are different, but that doesn’t give either sex more value or rights

Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
PIETER

Note that boys and girls are the same, yet different.
Boys and girls are inherently different and will have different experiences growing up; culture treats boys and girls differently, and we’ll need to disciple in response to those cultural influences and innate differences.

For example, most males are, on average, physically stronger than most females. That’s an innate difference; culture didn’t decide to make most males physically stronger than most females.
So we teach boys that their physical strength isn’t for taking what they want by force, but is to be used to serve those around them.

We teach boys to love and appreciate their body, but to know that their looks, athleticism, strength, and gifting are not the measure of their worth.
What they are interested in or how they dress doesn’t make them masculine.
They are valuable because God created them, and they are masculine because God created them male.

And we teach girls that a boy’s physical strength doesn’t give him the right to be in power over her or make demands of her.
We teach girls to look for the characteristics God values in boys rather than the characteristics culture values in boys.

Another example:
Because our American culture puts an extremely high value on a specific type of physical beauty, we teach girls that if their physical body happens to be what culture has deemed beautiful, they must not use their looks to manipulate others or feel that they are somehow better than other girls. 

We teach girls to love and appreciate their body, but to know that their beauty, strength, body size, and gifting are not the measure of their worth.
What they are interested in or how they dress doesn't make them feminine.
They are valuable because God created them, and they are feminine because God created them female.

And we teach boys that physical appearance isn’t what determines a girl’s value and worth.
We teach boys to look at more than a girl’s physical appearance when choosing friends or dates.

While men and women are different, and those differences are important, we do not have different natures and one gender is not God-ordained to be in power over the other. We are more alike than different.
 
Here’s one way I could say that:

“Boys and girls are the same, but also different.
What are some ways boys and girls are different? (give the child time to answer) Men and women do have differences – they are, on average, different sizes.
Men and women have different chromosomes and hormone levels.
Men and women have different private parts, and only women can become pregnant and give birth to a baby.
Those differences are good and right, and God made us to be different.
What are some ways boys and girls are the same? (give the child time to answer)
We’re alike in lots of ways, probably more ways than we are different:
boys and girls can enjoy the same activities, like the same kinds of food, play with the same toys, have the same jobs.
Another way boys and girls are alike: every boy and girl is a human being; some humans are girls and some humans are boys.
Was God ever human?
That’s right! Jesus was fully human and fully God.
Because Jesus also became a human and obeyed the law perfectly then died in our place to take the punishment for human sin, we, as humans, are able to be adopted into God’s family now.
Even though Jesus was a boy, girls can be part of God’s family, too, because girls and boys are the same - we are all human.”
Give a reason for sex difference
To image God in different and corresponding ways
Together, the body of Christ made up of women and men display the diversity of God
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
PIETER

Give a reason for sex difference.
Talk to kids about God’s purpose in creating humans as male and female.

Here’s one way I could say that:

“Why did God choose to create humans as male and female (boys and girls)?
(Give kids time to answer.)
Humans are made in God’s image and we are to be living pictures of what God is like. God is kind, so we are to be kind.
God is peace, so we are to try to be at peace with others.
God is also a Creator who partnered with the other persons in the Trinity to make the world and humans.
The Trinity is God in three persons.
They are all God, so they are the same, but they are each different persons - Father, Son, Holy Spirit - so they are different. 
In the same way, boys and girls are the same - we are all human - but we are also different - some humans are boys and some humans are girls. 
And one way we can be a living picture of God is to partner with others who are the same yet different from us to do good work for God’s kingdom.”

OR

“God also made humans as males and females because He intended for Christian marriage to be a picture of His love for His people.
God and humans are very different, yet God loves us completely. 
In a similar way, husbands and wives are different, but love each other completely. And since God made Christian marriage to be the best place for kids to grow up, God gave both males and females a part in creating new life: when a man’s sperm joins with a woman’s egg a completely new human being is created. 
When a husband and wife partner together to create a new life and then raise that child, they are a picture of the Trinity creating new life (humans) and raising up people to know God. 
Not everyone will be married or have children, but all Christians partner with both men and women to bring new life to God’s Church by telling others about Jesus.”

Remind kids that culture often offers us broken definitions of gender
Boys are by definition masculine
Girls are by definition feminine
Names, pronouns, and bathrooms reflect biosex, not gender
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Remind kids that culture often offers us broken definitions of gender.

Perhaps a girl is made fun of at school for wearing “boy clothes” or playing in a rough way or a boy is scolded by a family member for painting his fingernails or preferring to quietly play with a doll.
Remind kids that gender distinctions don’t lie in our hair, fingernails, clothes, mannerisms, likes, jobs, personality, etc.

As boys embrace their sex as God created them, submit their lives to Christ, lean into the giftings and callings God has placed in their lives, and seek to become more and more like Jesus, that is masculine.
As girls embrace their sex as God created them, submit their lives to Christ, lean into the giftings and callings God has placed in their lives, and seek to become more and more like Jesus, that is feminine.
Here’s one way you could say that:

“That’s not in the Bible.
Boys and girls are different, God made them different, and they experience the world differently.
But beyond our biology/bodies, it’s mostly mysterious how boys and girls are different. Like how God is mysterious.
Maybe it’s not helpful for us to try to figure out how boys and girls are different except to say that God made you a boy.
When people pretend to know how God made men and women different beyond what is in Scripture, it can hurt people. 
And maybe all we need to know is that God made us different as boys and girls and we honor that by recognizing that we are made, in the image of God, as a boy or girl, and do whatever we do as a boy or girl for the honor of God.”

You can teach that our name is given to us by our parents, and the pronouns we use reflect our biological sex.
And you can teach that if a kid feels most comfortable outside of the current cultural gender norms, they don’t have to change their name or pronouns nor do they have to change the way they express themselves as a boy or a girl.

Here’s a way you could say that:

“If you’re most comfortable outside of what others say girls are supposed to do (or “outside of what most girls do”), you don’t need to change how you dress or what you do, and you don’t need to change your name or pronouns.
You simply need to continue to do what God has called you to do and in that you are being a girl.
You can be who you are as God created you.
Our bodies and our souls are gifts from God; we cannot remake our body or our soul into what we want it to be, rather we ask God to help us be content in the body and soul that He gave us, we lament the brokenness of the world, and we hold onto the truth that God is a good Father who gives His children good gifts, including the sex He created us as.”
Reject broken cultural definitions of gender
Maintain that males/females are different biologically/physically in ways that lead to differences psychologically/spiritually
Resist urge to overprescribe what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are
Regardless of gender incongruence, teach every kid…

[Notes]
KAT

Reject broken cultural definitions of gender while continuing to maintain that males and females are different biologically/physically in ways that lead to differences psychologically/spiritually, and humbly resist the urge to overprescribe what universal, Biblical masculinity and femininity are.

Extra-biblical rules and roles obscure the truth about what it really means to follow Jesus as a boy/man or a girl/woman.
When leaders who think they’ve parsed out all the differences between men and women over-prescribe gender roles or insist men and women follow rigid gender rules, kids get hurt. 
They either become proud because they think they’re crushing it, or the rules crush them when they can’t live up to them or suffocate under them. 
We strive to point to Christ, not prove our gender.
How would resisting cultural prescription of gender be challenging for you? Could you maintain space for boys to paint their nails and wear dresses as boys? Could you maintain space for girls to buzz their hair and wear Axe body spray?
Discussion
more teens identifyingas trans?

[Notes]
PIETER

Are more teens identifying as trans? If so, why?
Safer to disclose trans experience
Broader spectrum of experiences not labeled as trans
Decreased trust in institutions/norms
Factors impacting increase trans identification

[Notes]
PIETER

Multiple influences are affecting the rise in transgender identification.
Social acceptance and shifting cultural norms/values around gender and gender expression mean that it is much safer to express a different gender identity than it was even just twenty years ago.
”Transgender” is now splintering into many categories, with new labels added regularly–agender, bigender, genderqueer, graygender, non-binary, gender expansive, gender nonconforming, gender fluid, etc. With more labels to choose from, the likelihood is higher that a person will find an identity they feel fits their experience of gender and choose to adopt that label. As more labels are created, more people will find a label that fits.
Across American culture, there is a growing cynicism toward authority and norms. Part of shedding the norms of traditional society and defying authority could include adopting a new gender identity.

A 2016 Brown University professor theorized that social contagion and peer pressure were leading to rising trans identification among teens without history of gender incongruence
The professor published research in 2018, but the methods and conclusions have been debated
Rapid onset gender dysphoria?

[Notes]
PIETER

At this point, people typically ask about Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria.

In 2016, a professor at Brown University wondered whether social contagion and peer pressure might be the cause for the rising number of teens taking on transgender identities despite no prior observable history of gender incongruence. 

She posted an online survey on three websites for parents who believed their child had developed symptoms of gender incongruence and began identifying as transgender simultaneously with other kids in their peer groups.

Based on the results of the survey, the professor published a study in 2018 speculating that swift emergence of distress related to gender was a “social coping mechanism,” and the term Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria (ROGD) was born.
Controversy ensued as criticism of the study’s methodology and conclusions were voiced by clinicians, trans activists, and researchers who pointed out that
no trans adolescents were surveyed, 
the websites where the surveys were posted were used by parents who openly objected to their child’s transgender identity, 
and the onset of gender distress may have seemed rapid from the parents’ perspective only because the adolescents experiencing incongruence chose not to tell them earlier.

Unfortunately, conservative parents, political leaders, and church leaders have latched onto this term and used it to blame the media, LGBT+ culture, social media, etc for the growing number of youth identifying as trans or seeking out social/medical transition, 
which has led to a wholesale dismissal of the genuine distress and pain that gender incongruence causes.


There isn’t enough evidence for a new scientific category, but the phenomena demands more study
teen girls, no history of incongruence, trans friends, heavily online, mental health concerns
Rapid onset gender dysphoria?

[Notes]
PIETER

In short, there’s not enough evidence to support ROGD as a genuine transgender experience, but there seems to be something to this phenomena:
teens, 
particularly biological girls, 
who have shown no signs of gender incongruence 
are suddenly identifying as transgender in increasing numbers. 
They often have several friends who identify as trans* 
and are often more socially accepted after identifying as trans* themselves.
These teens tend to have in common heavy engagement in social media 
and refusal to address other mental health concerns (63% "had one or more diagnoses of a psychiatric disorder or neurodevelopmental disability preceding their onset").
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many of these teens
watch large amounts of Anime, 
with some consuming Anime pornography; 
are heavily involved in online fanfic groups, 
particularly around fantasy; 
are lonely and feel misunderstood; 
and are often the “outsiders”
or on the fringe of their social groups.

They seem to be experiencing high levels of distress from several sources
and are seeking a way to explain their pain and a solution to end that pain.

Thus, they believe that transition will resolve their distress 
and lead to more social acceptance and belonging. 

Unfortunately, less than a third of transition clinicians choose to "explore issues of mental health, previous trauma, or any alternative causes of gender dysphoria before proceeding" with puberty blockers or cross-sex hormones for teens who present with sudden trans* identification.
If social contagion does play a role in these teens’ adoption of a new gender identity, 
it makes the most sense to consider this phenomenon as connected to the three influences previously listed, particularly the ever-evolving language around gender identity and the categorization of gender.
As more new categories of gender identification are created, more teens will find one that fits their experience.
So if ROGD is not considered a true trans* experience, what can we do? 

Recognize that kids and teens are vulnerable to a wide variety of outside influence.
Strive to have age-appropriate conversations about gender, sexuality, and mental health all throughout childhood.
Notice a teen’s distress and seek time-tested methods of reducing distress (like therapy, physical movement, connection with friends, etc). 
And if a teen does one day embrace a new gender identity without showing any signs of gender incongruence previously, instead of trying to convince a child that they’re not really genderqueer, bigender, or gender fluid, respond thoughtfully, stay curious, and ask questions that will guide a child to deeper understanding and nuance.

A teenage female in your immediate community comes out as trans and displays the common characteristics of ROGD. 
How could you balance tenderly receiving their disclosure while also creating space for them to re-examine their conclusions?
Discussion
casestudies

[Notes]
PIETER
“A male student has been part of a boys group over the past few years, but he shares with you that he’s coming to terms with being trans and would rather be in a girls group. Based on today’s sessions…”
Case study #1

[Notes]
A male student has been part of a boys group over the past few years, but he shares with you that he’s coming to terms with being trans and would rather be in a girls group. Based on today’s sessions, how could you respond?
a) Do you need to know more about how the student sees himself? And what steps of transition he’s considering? And what he hopes to communicate to others about this change?
b) How would different answers to those questions impact your decision?
c) What would complying with this request undeniably communicate to others? What might you need to say to other students and parents to
clarify what complying with this request means (and doesn’t)?

Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.
What are some developmentally appropriate ways to answer questions about God’s wisdom for trans people? E.g. “Is being trans a sin?”
Case study #2

[Notes]
Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.

nuance what it means to be trans
if merely experience GI, then certainly not!
a brokenness, but not a sin

if referring to social transition, it depends

if referring to hormonal or medical transition, some Christians are convinced that those steps are a rejection of God’s gift of a person’s biological sex

BUT, it’s important to remember how painful GI can be for some people
and that even if a person sins, God still loves us and is patient with us as we’re learning to following His voice

A student who has been serving as a small group leader shares with you privately that they experience gender incongruence. To what extent could they continue leading in each of the following cases…
Case study #3

[Notes]
A student who has been serving as a small group leader shares with you privately that they experience gender incongruence. To what extent could they continue leading in each of the following cases:

The student doesn’t tell anyone but you and their parents. The student internally identifies as trans, but only uses that word to describe their gender incongruence. They still believe that God intended for them to be the biological sex that they are and aren’t contemplating puberty blockers or hormonal transition.

b) The student only shares with you, their parents, and a close group of friends. The student identifies as trans internally and with those they’re out to, but only uses that word to describe their gender incongruence. They still believe that God intended for them to be the biological sex that they are and aren’t contemplating puberty blockers or hormonal transition.

c) The student wants to come out publicly as trans, but only uses that word to describe their gender incongruence. They still believe that God intended for them to be the biological sex that they are and aren’t contemplating puberty blockers or hormonal transition.

d) The student wants to come out publicly as trans, but only uses that word to describe their gender incongruence. They still believe that God intended for them to be the biological sex that they are and aren’t contemplating puberty blockers or hormonal transition. To help with some of the distress they’ve been experiencing around their gender incongruence, they’re considering going by an abbreviation of their name that’s less clearly male or female. They’re considering gender neutral pronouns. They’re interested in presenting in a more gender- neutral way.

e) The student wants to come out publicly as trans, and believes that their gender is who they truly are and their body is off. They’re considering going on puberty blockers and eventually hormone therapy. They want to start going by an opposite-gender name and opposite-gender pronouns. They’re also interested in presenting in an opposite-gender way.

Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.

If gender-neutral bathrooms aren’t available, what alternative solutions can leaders offer?
Case study #4

[Notes]
KAT

Buddy system. If you know someone who is struggling with gender incongruence and they have distress about bathrooms. Offer to go with them. Pull them aside and say “Hey, I want you to feel supported so you can always come get me and I will go in with you”. For me it helped if I walked in with someone as we were talking so that others knew I was clearly in the right room. 
Case study #5
What resources would Kat and Pieter recommend that leaders study on their own, recommend to parents, and be able to explore with families?
Talking to Kids about Gender Identity by Mark Yarhouse
Embodied by Preston Sprinkle
Emerging Gender Identities by Mark Yarhouse and Julia Sadusky
Equip’s Gender Incongruence Course
Case study #6
What are the biggest needs among LGBTQ+ students that Christian leaders can provide support around?
Care around co-occurring mental health concerns
Help students spend less time on their phone and more time in embodied community

[Notes]
PIETER
Case study #7
Based on today’s sessions, how might you proactively talk about God’s love and wisdom for trans students? How could you invite trans students to share with leaders to find support?

[Notes]
Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.

equip parents
to provide their kids with basic theology from a young age
invites students to share if they every feel like something is different about their gender or sexuality
that it’s not their fault
that God isn’t surprised or disappointed
that they don’t have to make sense of it alone
and that God still has good and beautiful plans for their life
During an earlier week in the quarter, a mom checked in her kid and indicated that the male-appearing child used they/them pronouns and a gender-neutral nickname. A few weeks later, the child’s dad checks the
child in and indicates that the male-appearing child uses he/him pronouns and the child’s…
Case study #8

[Notes]
During an earlier week in the quarter, a mom checked in her kid and indicated that the male-appearing child used they/them pronouns and a gender-neutral nickname. A few weeks later, the child’s dad checks the
child in and indicates that the male-appearing child uses he/him pronouns and the child’s full legal name. Assuming that you’ve used the preferences indicated by mom until the week that dad checked the child in, how would you respond to dad’s request? What additional information would you need? What conversation might you want to have with both parents? What conversation might you want to have with the child?

Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.


Six months ago, a teen who identified as a girl named Kelsey for as long as you had known her shared with leaders that they were trans, now went by the name Keller, and preferred he/him pronouns. At the time, Keller asked to be moved to a boys group during gender-split activities…
Case study #8

[Notes]
Six months ago, a teen who identified as a girl named Kelsey for as long as you had known her shared with leaders that they were trans, now went by the name Keller, and preferred he/him pronouns. At the time, Keller asked to be moved to a boys group during gender-split activities.
Last week, the student shared that they preferred the name Kel, they/them pronouns, and to move back to a girls group.
If you suspected the student might have a different set of preferences six months later, how would you respond to the request? What additional information would you need?

Spend 8 minutes in your group exploring these questions. Then we can hear from a couple of tables some of the responses they considered.


God’s Love & Wisdom
What can leaders/parents teach every kid about biological sex and gender?
Why are more teens identifying as transgender? (ROGD)
How can leaders support parents of trans kids?
How can leaders navigate sleeping arrangements, gender-split activities, etc.
Case studies!

[Notes]
PIETER 

What can leaders/parents teach every kid about biological sex and gender?
Why are more teens identifying as transgender? (ROGD)
How can leaders support parents of trans kids?
How can leaders navigate sleeping arrangements, gender-split activities, etc.
Case studies!



supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
KAT

What if a kid in your ministry does identify as trans? How can you support parents?
I) Encourage parents not to embrace a concrete trans identity on behalf of their child
Encourage their child to delay embracing a concrete trans identity
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
KAT

Encourage parents not to embrace a concrete trans identity on behalf of their child, 
and encourage their child to delay embracing a concrete trans* identity

Not because you doubt the child’s undeniable experience, 
but because some kids have great difficulty explaining their discomfort/disorientation, (especially with the mental and physical changes puberty brings)
and they reach out for something to explain and alleviate those feelings.

Quickly encouraging a transgender identity could enable a child to label the source of their discomfort/disorientation as gender incongruence
when they’re not actually experiencing robust feelings of disconnection or distress when it comes to their gender and biological sex, 
which means that the true source of their distress is masked and goes unaddressed.
II) Suggest that parents first address any mental health challenges
A majority of kids who experience gender incongruence also experience co-occurring mental health challenges, and transition has not been show to resolve
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
KAT

Suggest that parents first address any mental health challenges

A majority of kids who experience gender incongruence 
also experience co-occurring mental health challenges such as 
depression, 
anxiety, 
and suicidal ideation, 
and, to a lesser degree, but still in higher numbers than the cisgender population,
substance use disorders, 
bipolar disorder, 
eating disorders, 
autism, 
PTSD, 
and self-harm. 

Ensure a child’s mental health is cared for. Make mental health a priority.

Mental health must be addressed before any decisions can be made about names, pronouns, and risky medical interventions that will have at least some negative and irreversible consequences so that a child/teen is not making decisions about gender identity or dysphoria management out of a depressed or anxious state.
III) Recommend a stepwise approach
Begin with least invasive mitigation strategies, one at a time
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
PIETER

Recommend a stepwise approach

Once a child has been properly assessed, once parents have been able to determine whether a diagnosis of Gender Dysphoria is warranted, 
once parents have addressed co-occurring mental and physical health concerns, 
then the family can return to the question of how to respond to gender incongruence.

Taking a stepwise approach is best.

Begin with least invasive mitigation strategies 
and determine how helpful that step is before taking another step. 

And remember: 
taking steps to manage incongruence 
is not the same as a foregone conclusion of full medical transition. 
Taking steps does not mean 
that your ultimate goal is cross-sex hormones and gender-affirming surgery.
One of the challenges caregivers may experience here is pushback from the child/teen: 
“My gender isn’t a mental health concern! There’s nothing wrong with my mental health. 
You just need to accept my new gender identity and celebrate the diversity in gender experiences.” 

Of course, this isn’t surprising. 
Most people don’t want to think there’s something out of alignment, something that’s not the way it’s supposed to be. People want to be celebrated. 

But as Christians we aren’t called to simply celebrate who we are; that’s just not the framework we typically use. 
Rather we celebrate what God has done for us and how He continually sanctifies us and will one day return to usher in the New Heavens and New Earth where all will be made right.
So what are some steps that could be taken to address the distress from incongruence?

Address (and reject) shame from gender stereotypes
Identify shaming memories, mourn, name falsity, reaffirm their worth
Reject cultural gender stereotypes and resist over-prescription
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
PIETER

1) Start by addressing (and rejecting) shame from gender stereotypes. 

Remember what we learning this morning about caring for a child by 
helping them identify shaming memories like these, 
create space for them to connect with any lingering sadness or anger or fear and feel through those unprocessed feelings, 
name how false and arbitrary those forced choices were, and 
reassure them of their inherent worth and value as image bearers, including their unique ways of expressing themselves, even when it’s contrary to cultural stereotypes.

While the core of a child’s distress is an internal sense that their biological sex and felt gender are incongruent, 
feeling forced to comply with arbitrary cultural expectations can multiply distress. 

Help a child reduce pain related to their gender by giving them permission to reject cultural gender stereotypes. 

If instead you insist that a child adhere to rigid cultural gender stereotypes, your efforts will almost certainly backfire, is very likely to cause stress for the child, and could cause a rift in your relationship with the child.

Additionally, that is fear-based discipleship and teaching kids that love for them is conditional on whether they can display the right amount of gender for others.

A child may attempt to comply, either out of fear of you or because they want to please you, but embracing the tight boxes of cultural gender stereotypes won’t really be helpful for them.

Encourage kids to find belonging and share their story
Get kids off social media and into embodied friendship
Invite teens to share their story with trusted Christian mentors, pastors, and friends
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
KAT

2) Encourage kids to find belonging and share their story (especially a child who has entered puberty)

Just like we explored this morning for adults, students who experience gender incongruence need places where they can make sense of their distress and find belonging, 
particularly apart from social media. 

Studies continue to show adverse effects of spending too much time on social media platforms, particularly for teens:
bullying/blackmail, 
sleep loss, 
unrealistic views of others’ lives,
heightened risk of depression and anxiety, 
a decline in life satisfaction, 
a belief that others are happier than they are.

If s child seems to struggle with making friends or spends most of their waking hours online or seems to be obsessing over what a YouTube or TikTok personality is teaching them about gender incongruence, it would probably be best to set limits, monitor their accounts, encourage face-to-face contact with friends, and talk about the links between social media and mental health concerns.

Additionally, encourage kids to share with story with trusted Christian mentors, pastors, and friends.  

Trans Christians need to share about their experiences to be fully known and fully loved. 
These opportunities for Christian fellowship can contribute to greater spiritual growth, discovering shared meaning in suffering, and enjoying healthy intimacy in a community of believers.
Invite kids to accept enduring brokenness/suffering
Offer a robust and tender theology of suffering
Promise them that you won’t leave their side and show them that through your actions
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
KAT

3) Respond to that pain by inviting your child to accept enduring brokenness/suffering. 

Remember we explored this some this morning.

Unfortunately, all believers, in one way or another, will continue to experience some physical or emotional or spiritual brokenness for the rest of their lives.

Part of being a Christian on this side of Christ’s return is learning to live with some level of brokenness. 
That’s why we yearn so much for Jesus to return and make everything right, including giving us perfect resurrection minds, bodies, and souls! 

Make space for them to be angry, sad, afraid, and numb. 
Reassure them that their feelings are valid and that their pain is real. 
Promise them that you won’t leave their side and show them that through your actions.
Employ mitigation strategies that don’t include medical transition
hairstyle, androgynous clothing, baggy clothing, nail polish, gender neutral nickname/pronouns, single-stall bathrooms, raising/lowering voice pitch, etc.
Supporting parents of trans kids

[Notes]
PIETER
4) Employ mitigation strategies that do not include medical transition.
As we discussed, these steps can only be taken in a healthy way if the child/teen navigating gender incongruence has addressed co-occurring mental health concerns. 

Ask them, “Are you truly in a place to make risky medical decisions that will almost certainly have at least some negative and irreversible consequences?” 

Additionally, we know that most gender incongruence does not persist into adulthood; only about 20% of children and teens who experience gender incongruence still feel like their sex and gender don’t align after puberty. 
Medically transitioning as a child or teen and then de-transitioning after puberty will only add to distress felt.

Even some on the radical left have discouraged allowing children to transition due to the short-term and long-term health risks related to puberty blockers and hormonal drug treatments. 

Health risks for puberty blockers include
student height, 
diminished bone density, 
headaches, 
hot flashes, 
weight gain, 
mood and emotion alterations, 
negative effects on memory and concentration, 
negative effects on self-control and mental flexibility, 
negative effect on IQ level, 
and stunted genitalia. 

The health risks associated with cross-sex hormone therapy include 
adverse changes in blood pressure and cholesterol, 
increased risk of heart attack and stroke,
increased risk of blood clots, 
increased risk of cancer, 
irreversible changes (like a lower voice for biological females), 
increased risk of infertility. 

If significant distress remains 
after mental health concerns have been addressed, 
after shame has been addressed, 
after gender stereotypes and overprescription have been rejected, 
and after community has been established and after the child has been away from excessive social media use, 
then a child can begin discussing what non-medical steps of transition may help mitigate the distress of gender incongruence. Management of incongruence can be thought of as a continuum moving from “least invasive” (like a hairstyle change)  to “most invasive” (hormones and surgery). 

The goal is not to move through the entire continuum and end up at hormones and surgery. 

Parents can treat any mitigation strategy as its own step and help a child determine whether they might be able to stay there, in a healthy way, long term. 

Some morally neutral, non-medical steps to address incongruence may include 
a change in hairstyle, 
wearing androgynous clothing, 
wearing loose or baggy clothing to obscure body shape, 
wearing clothing or accessories that are typically used by the opposite sex (like men wearing nail polish), 
going by a gender-neutral nickname,
using gender-neutral pronouns,
wearing a sports bra to flatten breasts,
using single-stall or gender-neutral bathrooms, 
engaging in activities that are stereotypically considered to be for a different gender, 
raising or lowering the pitch of the voice.

And as we discussed earlier, any of these steps could be taken as a way to sinfully attempt to remake one’s biological sex or deceive others about one’s biological sex. 

Other non-medical mitigation strategies that are more in the moral gray area include
using opposite sex bathrooms, 
using opposite sex pronouns, 
using a name that is culturally thought of as a name for the opposite sex, and 
legal transition.
Prayer and discernment within Christian community are key.
Even if a child takes all the steps they possibly can without crossing into a rejection of their biological sex, a child may continue to experience some persisting and painful gender incongruence. 

Remember that hormonal and surgical transition have not been shown to effectively reduce suicidality,
but students may still yearn for further relief and will certainly be burdened by cultural messages that further transition will eliminate their distress. 

Respond to that pain by inviting a child to accept some level of enduring brokenness.

Which morally neutral social transition steps might your community find most challenging to accommodate?
How could leaders mediate that discomfort for community members?
Discussion
let’s get practical

[Notes]
PIETER

Some might prefer to address practical questions on a case-by-case basis,
but that strategy is more likely to lead to painfully-inconsistent application.
Instead, churches can do their best to anticipate practical realities and describe policies that balance love and wisdom,
while humbly recognizing that the exact placement of boundaries may be imperfect.
Gender minorities prefer clarity that reduces anxiety, even when they disagree with the ultimate placement of those boundaries.
The following are suggestions for policies at your church,
but these suggestions are by no means definitive:

Respect the preference of parents (particularly if younger)
Respect the preference of teens driving themselves to activities
Practice various responses to students and parents
Names/pronouns for students

[Notes]
PIETER

Name/pronouns for/around students
Remember our encouragement from the all-staff training to generally employ language mirroring as an act of hospitality
I default to respecting the preferences of parents, particularly if they’re kids or younger teens.

Ultimately, discipleship is parents’ responsibility, and I’ll respect that.
If parents want me to honor a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that.
If parents want me to ignore a kid’s pronoun/name requests, then I’ll do that. 

But in that case, I will clearly communicate to the kid that 
God loves trans people. 
He’s not surprised by the questions they’re navigating 
or offended by their existence. 
He wants to walk with them 
and offer them His wisdom. 
And I feel the same. 
I love them. 
I want to walk with them.

As a policy, I respect the request of parents, but I want them to know that that doesn’t change anything about my care for them. I hope they’ll understand.

That being said, I’ll generally respect a kid or young teen’s request until I hear something otherwise from parents.
Now, when it comes to older teens who are driving themselves to church, for example, I’ll generally respect their request.
Okay, but I know what some of you are thinking.
Using these alternate names and pronouns around other kids is going to invariably lead to kids asking questions.
And to parents who disagree with pronoun/name hospitality raising concerns. How would we suggest you respond to those concerns?
Remember those potential responses that we reviewed earlier and are printed in your handout
So like I said, a lot of complexity, a lot of nuance.
The biggest thing I want to communicate is that we can be nuanced and polite and defer to the authority of parents to raise their kids in the Lord.

More often than not, trans teens prefer privacy away from people of the same or opposite sex
Be creative
Be prepared to inform other students/parents
Sleeping arrangements on trips

[Notes]
KAT

Wisdom about sleeping arrangements on teen trips
Most trans people don't want to sleep in a space with people of the opposite sex (or the same sex).

More often than not, they prefer privacy away from both people of the same sex and people of the opposite sex.

If possible, avoid same-sex sleeping arrangements.
This will also accommodate gay teens, teens struggling with body shame,
or teens who are uncomfortable undressing around other people for a variety of reasons.
When shared sleeping areas cannot be avoided, modesty rules may reduce anxiety for a range of teens.
In addition, a trans student could stay in a private room close to shared sleeping areas, stay with leaders,
or offer for the student to commute.
Different teens will prefer different solutions.
The key is to communicate with the teen about what solutions make them comfortable,
so they can focus on the much more important intention of the trip:
enjoying Christian fellowship and deepening their relationship with Christ.
It’s important to note that if you offer for a trans teen to stay in a shared sleeping place with teens of the opposite sex,
you would do well to inform students and parents appropriately (after discussion and permission from the trans* teen),
as to avoid controversy of withholding that information only for it to be discovered later.

Avoid gender-split groupings and activities when you can
Push back on purity culture by teaching teens to fellowship with those of the opposite sex instead of being quarantined
Gender-split activities

[Notes]
KAT

Wisdom for gender-split activities/grouping
Similar to sleeping arrangements, 
avoid anything gender-split if you can

I appreciate that there’s ages where teens can get particularly distracted by the opposite sex

But perhaps it’s just as valuable to teach teens to be vulnerable in healthy ways around people they might be attracted to

You could also have opt-in small groups, some based on gender 
and some coed 
and some based on the school they’re from or other affinities

“There's a lot of ways that people's bodies and minds are broken, but one way is that some people have the body of a male but feel like a woman inside. Because that's so painful, those people sometimes ask their friends to use different pronouns to refer to them because it makes life just a little bit easier. But I want you to know that I'm honoring their request as a way of being hospitable…
Encourage cis kid empathy

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s some different ways you can encourage empathy from cis students. You can say:

“There's a lot of ways that people's bodies and minds are broken, 
but one way is that some people have the body of a male but feel like a woman inside. Because that's so painful, those people sometimes ask their friends to use different pronouns to refer to them because it makes life just a little bit easier. 
But I want you to know that I'm honoring their request as a way of being hospitable, but that doesn't mean I agree with their decision to use different pronouns. Ultimately, God made each of us, and only God has the right to say whether someone is a man or a woman.”

Or you can say

“In God's family, we recognize that we are the sex that our biology and body points to, that God didn't make a mistake, and that sometimes the brokenness of the world means some people experience a mismatch between their body and how they feel on the inside. 
God isn't surprised when we experience brokenness, and He gave us His Spirit, His word, and the Church to comfort us and support us.
If you ever feel like your body and your mind/soul don’t match, please tell me and I will support you and help you. 
You won’t need to reject God's design for your body.”

Or you can say

“We know that how we feel on the inside doesn’t change our body, 
but because of the brokeness of the world, some people feel really strongly that they were born as the wrong sex. 
They feel like a boy on the inside, but they have a vagina and uterus and breasts. 
Or they feel like a girl on the inside, but they have XY chromosomes. 
The people who feel that way aren’t bad or gross. 
They didn’t choose to feel like that. You might hear the words “gender dysphoria” or “gender incongruence” or “trans*” to describe those experiences. 
And some people who experience gender incongruence may choose to cope with the brokenness by assuming that God put them together wrong. 
They may decide to reject their body’s biological sex and instead take steps to align their body to the gender they feel like they are in their soul/mind. 
That could include changing their name, wearing different clothes, changing their hairstyle, saying that they're a boy instead of a girl, or even taking pills or having surgery to change their body. 
When someone asks us to use a different name for them or use "he" instead of "she," we can choose to do that as an act of hospitality to them. 
Maybe this isn't what God hoped for them, but they're hurting, and this is the way they've asked us to comfort them.”

OR YOU CAN say

“When someone says they’re transgender, they’re saying they feel like their body doesn’t match what they feel like inside. 
A biological male may not feel like a boy; 
a biological female may not experience herself as a girl. 
But they don’t choose to have that experience. 
It’s not about bad decisions or unwise choices. 
We don’t really know enough about gender incongruence to say things like, ‘People are born transgender,’ and people don’t experience gender incongruence because they somehow ‘fell away from God’ or ‘went down a wrong path.’”

There will be conversations about gender and gender incongruence that you don’t initiate. 
Plan for these by having a solid foundation of gender and gender ethics that you can apply to those unplanned conversations. 

Some conversations will call for more compassion or respect, 
while others will foreground your convictions. 

Be prepared by knowing how you’ll want to define gender, biological sex, and transgender with students and think through ways you might talk about gender identity and trans experiences. 

And be prepared for pushback, especially from tweens and teens–choose to listen respectfully and agree to disagree when needed.

“A parent may decide to allow their pre-teen/teen to delay puberty because they experience gender incongruence. Your friend may feel that going through puberty will be really, really hard for him,  so he wants to use puberty blockers as a way to give him time to consider his options.  But even people who use puberty blockers will eventually go…”
Navigate transition among cis

[Notes]
PIETER

Here’s some different ways you can navigate hormonal transition with cis students. You can say:
“A parent may decide to allow their pre-teen/teen to delay puberty because they experience gender incongruence.
Your friend may feel that going through puberty will be really, really hard for him, 
so he wants to use puberty blockers as a way to give him time to consider his options. 
But even people who use puberty blockers will eventually go through puberty. 
If your friend decides to go through puberty as a boy, he can stop taking the blockers and he would enter puberty. 
He could also decide to take cross-sex hormones. 
Puberty would be a different experience for him, then, but he could be hoping that taking estrogen would erase his incongruence.

Or you could say:
“Scientists have conflicting opinions about whether puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones are helpful for people or have significantly negative side effects. As Christians we also want to think about God’s wisdom for these kinds of situations. Part of the decision-making process for a Christian would be to pray for wisdom, seek out the guidance of spiritual mentors, study relevant Bible passages, and spend time discerning God’s best path.”

Or you could say:

“Ultimately, based on my own study of the Bible and wise Christian leaders, I believe that if a person’s biological sex is known (chromosomes, primary and secondary sex characteristics, and private parts all point to the same biological sex), we know God intended to gift them with a particular gender. In your friend’s case, he is male and God intended for him to feel like a boy. But his gender is broken; he doesn’t feel like a boy. The way to deal with that brokenness isn’t to break his body through surgical alterations or attempt to remake his biology to fit his broken gender through cross-sex hormones; rather, God’s best would be for him to faithfully manage his broken gender.”

Importantly, you can add the following to any discussion about gender ethics:

“Even so, enduring broken gender is hard. Gender is just as central to a person as their body. Enduring the distress of gender incongruence is just as devastating and deserving of compassion as enduring a broken body. If Christians are going to invite your friend to honor God’s gift of his biological sex and refrain from hormonal/surgical transition and instead endure the pain of persisting gender incongruence, we must recognize that we are calling him to something incredibly difficult and we must support him as he seeks to faithfully manage this brokenness.”

