


God-honoring Sexual



STEWARDSHIP




Pieter Valk of

[Notes]
share about me and why I’m here to talk about this
organization provides training to communities of Christians around areas of sexuality
we’ve worked with Lipscomb University, Ethos Church, Maury Hills Church, West End Church of Christ, Campbell Street Church of Christ, and Otter Creek Church
I have my Masters in Clinical Mental Health Counseling from Lipscomb University during which I focused on Christians navigating questions of sexuality
And I currently meet with students at the Lipscomb University Counseling Center making sense of these questions



God-honoring Sexual



STEWARDSHIP


[Notes]
when I do these training, I often hear from youth pastors and parents that they feel ill-equipped to guide children and teens to think about questions of sexuality in theologically accurate and compassionate ways
 
I want to address the following questions:
how has God invited all of us to steward our sexualities, how should that inform how we respond to the ways all of our sexualities are broken, and how can we share this with our children?



Key Question



How has God invited all people to steward their sexualities?

[Notes]
tonight we are really going to focus on how you personally think about sexual stewardship
because if you’ve thought about this well for yourself, taking the next step of sharing about this with your children in ways that fit how your family works will come naturally

not as simple as saving sex for marriage with someone of the opposite sex
and I recognize we might have some disagreement with even that



Key Question



How has God invited all people to steward their sexualities?
What kinds of relationships did God create us for?
What are the most good things that God is inviting us into?
How do we know what God has called us to?



[Notes]
Here are some questions that I think will help us answer that question:
what kinds of relationships did God create us for?
what are the most good things that God is inviting us into?
how do we know what God has called us to?

because ultimately, we want the best things for our children
the best things come from God
but how do we know what those best things are that God is offering
well that’s why theology is important
What I am going to share is grounded in Scripture and you will see references throughout
Nothing I will share is contrary to Scripture
But can we answer all of these questions with just Scripture? I’m not so sure
Thankfully the Church has taught consistently about this for the past 2000 years
so I’m going to share how God has invited us to steward our sexualities
we’ll ask questions along the way
and then we’ll discuss how we can apply this and have conversation with our children



Sexual Stewardship



All first called to a period of abstinent singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to lifelong marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Others called to lifelong celibacy and intimate family in the Body of Christ

[Notes]
Here is my summary of God’s narrative for sexual stewardship




Created for Love



God in the Trinity and in covenants with His people:
Complementary (Matthew 19:3-12, Mark 10:2-12, Genesis 1:26-27)
Intimate (1 John 4:19)
Procreative (Genesis 1:28)
Faithful (Isaiah 54:6-8, Hosea 3:1)
Sacrificial (Ephesians 5:23, Galatians 6:2)

[Notes]
We need to start by looking at who God is and how He loves



Created for Love



We are created in God’s image for that kind of love with God and each other

Sexuality – our need for relationship, to know and be known, to give and receive that kind of love

[Notes]
A - we are all made for diverse, intimate, procreative relationships that are marked by commitment and sacrifice

B - and because we are mind, body, and spirit, we need connection on cognitive, physical, and spiritual levels



Created for Love



We are all created for family in the Body of Christ (Genesis 2, Leviticus 26:12) 

Family – a small community of Christians who embody the gospel for each other

Neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs

[Notes]
but where and how we find that may look different depending on whether we are called to celibacy or marriage



Created for Love



None of us can meet our intimacy needs fully or finally in this lifetime (Isaiah 59:2)

If we don’t meet our intimacy needs in healthy ways, our flesh will reach out for destructive and unsatisfying alternatives (1 Corinthians 7:1-40)



Our first calling



A period of abstinent singleness
Enjoy relationship with God and the Body of Christ
Called to neither lifelong celibacy nor marriage
Submit our sexuality to God, study the Scriptures, discern with God and others

[Notes]
A - What are we called to? How do we meet our intimacy needs?

B - We should not assume that we are called to marriage just because we have sexual desires, want to be a parent, or find abstinent singleness to be too challenging. 



Turn & Talk



We are all created for family, yet neither sex nor marriage is promised or necessary to meet our intimacy needs. How can that be so?

Does God allow people to have significant sexual desires, a desire to be a parent, and allow them to struggle with abstinent singleness yet call them to a lifetime of celibacy? How is that good?
15



What’s the Bible say…



…about celibacy and marriage?
Matthew 19:8-12
Better to be celibate if cannot accept what Christian marriage is
We do not choose celibacy or marriage, we are called

[Notes]
So what does the Bible say about celibacy and marriage?
Highlight two big passages in this conversation

In Matthew 19:8-12, Jesus calls married people to a deeper level of commitment to each other. 

He recognizes that for those who cannot make this level of commitment, it would be better for them not to marry. 
Some have been called to marriage, others have been called to celibacy. 
To illustrate this point, Jesus compares our experience to that of a eunuch—a person who refrains from sex and is not married. 
He notes that some are this way because of how they are born (genital defects); that some are made eunuchs by others (referring to genital mutilation, enslavement, and any other involuntary process); and that others choose this lifestyle (choose lifelong celibacy). 

Importantly, Jesus recognizes that celibacy is not always chosen and that some who are called to celibacy are called involuntarily.



What’s the Bible say…



…about celibacy and marriage?
1 Corinthians 1: 7-8, 32-25
Preference for celibacy
Marriage will be a gift to those who are called to it

[Notes]
In 1 Corinthians 1: 7 and 8, Paul recommends that Christians refrain from sex and not marry. 

He communicates a preference for celibacy and a desire that all would be celibate, but he recognizes that all are not called to celibacy. 

Paul recognizes that for those who are called to marriage, that will be a gift as well. 
Continuing in verses 32 through 35, he advocates for celibacy because the concern of the celibate is not divided between God and one’s spouse and children.

The New Testament strongly encourages celibacy and recognizes that celibacy is given, not chosen—some will find themselves called to celibacy despite their personal preference.
The New Testament allows for marriage for those who are called to it, recognizing that marriages provides a vision of Christ’s relationship with the Church that ministers to both those who are married and those who are celibate.
Nevertheless, the Bible recognizes that marriage is difficult and should be entered into cautiously. 
Ultimately, the Bible comes up just short of calling all people to celibacy, but it also reprimands the person who assumes he or she will be married.




Called to Marriage



Christian marriage is a lifetime vocation between a man and a woman to enjoy intimacy, raise children for the Body of Christ, and embody the gospel for each other and the world

[Notes]
Let’s talk about these two vocations practically



Called to Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Complementary of the genders/sexes both psychologically and biologically reflect the Trinity and Christ’s relationship with the Church
Intimate – sexually, emotionally, and spiritually



Called to Marriage



How does marriage embody the gospel?
Procreative – raise children
Faithful – lifetime commitment
Sacrificial – of personal desires and preferences

[Notes]
those called to marriage will thrive when they seek to fulfill these purposes
Churches must teach accurately about what marriage is and support families to keep their vows and raise children



Turn & Talk



Both Jesus and Paul seem to communicate a preference for celibacy. How do we square that with the low frequency of celibate people in our churches and the high place marriage holds?
The idea that Christian marriage must embody the procreative and complementary natures of God’s love has been contentious. How essential are these? What are the consequences of dismissing these as essential?
27



Called to Celibacy



Celibacy is NOT a call to loneliness for the sake of the gospel

Celibacy IS a call to diverse, intimate, and spiritually procreative relationships that are maintained by commitment and sacrifice

[Notes]
This is really important for me as someone called to lifelong celibacy
It is still a call to satisfying companionship that I can depend on
I still need and should have friendships that I do life with daily where we are committed to each other and can expect each other to be a part of each others’ lives for the next 30 years



Called to Celibacy



Unique benefits:
Deeper friendship
Greater possibility for spiritual parenthood, church leadership, and healing of broken families
Can take greater risks for the gospel

[Notes]
People often ask: why do we need to distinguish between a period of abstinent singleness versus a lifelong vocation of celibacy? What’s the difference?
While they have some similar rhythms and challenges, they are very different
A period of abstinent singleness is not a vocation, it is a time of waiting and discerning
Where as a commitment to lifetime celibacy is, in part, an acceptance that one will not get married and a commitment not to seek out romantic relationships
One of the big differences is that a person is not willing to make the commitments and sacrifices necessary to find family in the Body of Christ outside of marriage until a person has accepted that he or she will not be married
Does that make sense?
A person still in the period of abstinent singleness with the possibility of marriage can’t make a commitment to a group of other single Christians to essentially be family for each other for the next 40 years
But a person committed to celibacy can



Called to Celibacy



Providing spaces for celibates to thrive is part of the Church’s DNA
Honor and support celibacy in practical and structural ways
Embrace and thrive in the calling
Celibacy and marriage are equal with different advantages and challenges

[Notes]
doing celibacy well was easier in a time and place where everyone lived in multi-family, multi-generational homes
but the wealth of our society has made that uncommon, if not weird
so how do we do this in a modern context?
we need a new narrative for this, a modern narrative for a modern problem
yet we aren’t without examples—creating space for celibate people dates back to the early church
the gospel called people to have one wife, which led to many widows
in Acts 6, the church accepted the responsibility to create space for those widows and provide for them
that is in the DNA of the Church

For those called to celibacy, the Church must honor and support that calling in practical and structural ways so that they can meet their intimacy needs in healthy ways.

Those who find themselves in continued celibacy, despite their desire to be married (whether because they are not yet married, widowed, divorced), will benefit from accepting their present circumstances, embracing their current calling, and learning to thrive in it.
These individuals may find it comforting (or discouraging) that Jesus recognized that some will be called to celibacy involuntarily but should accept and embrace their circumstances nonetheless.

We must recognize and teach that celibacy and marriage are equal with different sets of advantages and challenges.



Turn & Talk



When done well, those called to celibacy enjoy companionship in intimate, committed relationships that is as fulfilling as marriage. How can celibate people enjoy this ”family” in the Body of Christ? What are the greatest challenges to realizing that? How can our churches help celibate people experience that?
39



Sexual Stewardship



All first called to a period of abstinent singleness and discernment, later…
Some called to lifelong marriage with someone of the opposite sex
Others called to lifelong celibacy and intimate family in the Body of Christ

[Notes]
Here is my summary of God’s narrative for sexual stewardship

God offers relationship with Him and the Body of Christ as the solution to loneliness
Spiritual friendship is a satisfying source of companionship available to all
Marriage is a vocation for the purpose of raising children
God calls many to a flourishing life of celibacy
All enjoy deep friendship in the Body of Christ and support each other in their vocations



Why does it matter?



Both are about embodying the gospel:
Diverse, intimate, and procreative relationships maintained by commitment and sacrifice point to the Trinity and Christ + the Church
Celibacy reflects Christ’s life and future patterns in the New Heaven and New Earth

[Notes]
why is Christian orthodoxy about sexual stewardship important?



Turn & Talk
As a whole, what about this narrative is challenging? How does it contrast with the narrative of sexual fulfillment offered by culture and many churches?



48



Why does it matter?



Many ways sexuality is broken:
Divorce
Widowing
Infertility
Pornography
Masturbation
Fornication
Adultery
Abortion
Contraception
Same-sex attraction
Broken gender

[Notes]
This narrative is the best ways to address sexual brokenness. Making loud arguments against what is bad isn’t compelling. Let’s offer how we can flourish. And then ask how that narrative could inform how we respond to brokenness.
Here’s a list of all of the ways sexuality is broken as a result of the Fall
Some of these are the result of personal sin, others are the result of the sins of others
But all of these are communal sins that require communal responses

Could spend an hour on each of these talking about how God’s narrative for sexual stewardship should inform how we respond to these challenges



The Problem(s)



The Church isn’t doing this well:
We don’t really believe those things
Few churches teach those things
And even fewer put them into practice



What we believe…



If God gives people desires to marry and have kids, then He wants them to marry
Marriage is primarily about companionship and mutual fulfillment
If we get married, we only have to have kids if and when we want them
God calls a select few to celibacy and sustains them spiritually
Friendship can’t provide what marriage can and shouldn’t be too close



The Problem(s)



This hurts all Christians:
Children grow up hearing all people will be straight, married, and have kids
Failed marriages due to refusing a call to celibacy and inaccurate expectations
Celibates struggle with loneliness and married people raise children alone



Turn & Talk
How have you seen these shortcomings in your community?

How have they impacted Christians in your community?






Turn & Talk
How could you share this with your children?

What resources and support do you need from your church to do that well?






QUESTIONS?

