




Thanks for coming to our
Quarterly Prayer Gathering!
We will start at 8:05 pm cst. 

[Notes]
My name is Pieter Valk
I studied at Vanderbilt University, Lipscomb University, and Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary. One day a week I’m a licensed professional counselor who meets with gay people trying to make sense of their faith and sexuality. The rest of the week, I lead an organization called EQUIP. We’re a team of missionary consultants that help churches become places where gay people can thrive according to a traditional sexual ethic. 
There’s a reason why both of my jobs focus on the intersection of faith and sexuality: I am a Christian. I am gay. And I believe that God calls all Christians to vocational singleness or Christian marriage with someone of the opposite sex.

Also, I want to make 2 quick notes about terminology. First, what do I mean when I say “gay” and “gay Christian?” I’m going to be using the word “gay” most frequently today as a general, catch-all term for people who are attracted to people of the same sex, whether they be gay, lesbian, or bisexual. I don’t mean to communicate anything about their theological beliefs or what kind of relationships they are seeking out by using that word. It only means “boys who like boys” or “girls who like girls”. And I’ll use the phrase “gay Christian” to refer to people who are Christians and experience same-sex attraction. I use that phrase to describe myself because that’s the term that I’m most comfortable with. But not everyone uses that phrase, and Christians I respect prefer to use different language. There is healthy discussion Christians can have about that disagreement. For now, I’ll use the word gay as I’ve defined it here.

Second, how would I suggest you navigate identity language conversation with students? Term-mirroring. Arguments about what words Christians should use to describe themselves can be an early barrier to the important conversations: do you know Jesus, is He your Lord and Savior, and would you consider following God’s wisdom for sexual stewardship? So instead of getting stuck in identity language conversations, practice term mirroring. Ask students what words they use to describe themselves and what those words mean to them. Then choose to use their words with there definitions as an act of hospitality. This doesn’t mean you are agreeing with their definitions or identifications. It just means you’re not letting identity language conversations be a barrier.
